--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---
MYSTICAL DIMENSION S OF ISLA M

--- Page 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 4 ---
by ANNEMARI E SCHIMMEL
MYSTICAL
DIMENSIONS
OF
ISLAM
The Universit y of North Carolin a Press
Chapel Hil l

--- Page 5 ---
© /975 The University  ofNorth Carolina  Press
All rights reserved
Manufactured in  the United States of America
09 08 07 06 05 20 jp 18 ij id
Library o f Congres s Catalogin g in Publicatio n Data
Schimmel, Annemarie.
Mystical dimensions  of Islam.
Includes bibliographical  referentes,
i. Sufism. I. Tule.
epi8g.2.sj4 2 97'-4 73-16112
!SBN 0-8078-1223-4  (doth)
ISBN-I): 978-0-8078-1271-6  (pbk.)

--- Page 6 ---
TO TH E SAINT S OF SHIRA Z

--- Page 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 8 ---
CONTENTS
ILLUSTRATIONS / xi
ABBREVIATIONS / xiii
FOREWORD / Xvii
THE ARABI C ALPHABE T AN D
NOTE ON TRANSCRIPTION / xix
THE MUSLIM YEAR / XXi
1. WHAT IS SUFISM? / 3
2. HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF
CLASSICAL SUFISM / 23
The Formative  Period / 23

--- Page 9 ---
viii /  CONTENT S
Some Mystical  Leaders of
the Late Ninth Century / 42
Al-Hallaj, Martyr  of Mystical  Love / 62
The Period  of Consolidation:
From Shibli  to Ghazzal i / 77
3. TH E PAT H / 98
The Foundations  of the Path I 98* / 90
Stations an d Stages / 109
Love and Annihilation  / 130
Forms of Worship / 148
4. MA N AND HIS PERFECTIO N / 187
Some Notes  on Sufi Psychology  / 187
Good and Evil: The Role of Satan / 193
Saints and Miracles  / 199
The Veneration of the Prophet / 213
5. SUF I ORDER S AN D FRATERNITIE S / 228
Community Life / 228
Abu Said ibn Abil-Khayr / 241
The First  Orders / 244
6. THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM / 259
Suhrawardi Maqtul,
the Master  of Illumination  / 259
Ibn cArabi, the Great Master / 263
Ibn al-Farid, Mystical Poet / 274
The Development  of
Ibn 'Arabi' s Mysticism  of Unity / 279
7. TH E ROS E AN D TH E NIGHTINGALE :
PERSIAN AN D TURKIS H
MYSTICAL POETR Y / 287
Immortal Rose  / 287
The Pilgrimage  of the Birds:
Sanai and Attar / 301
Maulana Jalaluddi n Rumi / 309
Turkish Popular  Mysticism  / 328

--- Page 10 ---
CONTENTS / ix
8. S U F I S M IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 344
The Classical  Period / 344
The "Naqshbandl  Reaction"  / 363
Khwaja Mi r Dard, a "Sincere  Muhammadan"  / 373
Mystical Poetry  in the Regional  Languages—
Sindhi, Panjabi,  Pashto / 383
9. EPILOGUE / 403
APPENDIX 1
Letter Symbolism  in Sufi Literature  I 411
APPENDIX 2
The Feminine  Element in Sufism I 426
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 437
ADDENDUM TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY / 469
INDEX OF KORANIC QUOTATIONS / 475
INDEX OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS / 477
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES / 479
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 497

--- Page 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 12 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
The Martyrdo m of al-Halla j / 63
Woman in Trance / 151
Abul-Adyan Passin g through the Pyre / 201
Rembrandt's Cop y of a Mogul Miniatur e / 233
Sanan Tendin g the Swine / 269
Saint with Tame Lions / 349

--- Page 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 14 ---
ABBREVIATIONS
Since thi s book is intende d primaril y for the general
reader, w e have—thoug h reluctantly—refraine d from having too
many footnote s or too large a bibliography . The reader will find
much additiona l informatio n about personalities , terminology , and
historical fact s in the Encyclopedia  of Islam (1913-36 ; 2d ed.,
1960–); th e relevan t articles have not been mentione d in the
footnotes.
The followin g frequentl y cited works are abbreviate d
in the text:
A Abu Nuaym al-Isfahani . Hilyat ul-auliya . 10 vols.
Cairo, 1932 .
AD Fariduddi n Attar. Diwan- i qasaid wa ghazaliyat.  Ed-
ited by Said Nafisi. Tehran , 1339 sh./1960 . Numbe r
of poem cited.
AP Armaghdn-i  Pak. Edited by Sheikh Muhamma d Ikram.
Karachi, 1953 .
B Ruzbiha n Baqli. "Sharh-i  shathiyat, " Les paradoxes  des
soufis. Edite d by Henri Corbin. Tehran and Paris, 1966.
Paragraphs cited .
BA Ruzbiha n Baqli. "Abhar  al-ashiqin, " Le jasmine  des
fidèles d'amour.  Edited by Henri Corbin. Tehran and
Paris, 1958 . Paragraph s cited.
BO Joh n K. Birge. The Bektashi  Order of Dervishes.  1937.
Reprint. London , 1965.
CL Henr i Corbin. L'Homme  de lumière dans le soufisme
iranien. Paris , 1971.
D Jalaluddi n Rumi. Diwan- i kabir yd Kulliyat- i Shams.
Edited by Badiuz-Zama n Furuzanfar . Vols. 1-7. Teh-
ran, 1336 sh./1957 . Number of poem cited.
G Abu Hamid al-Ghazzall . Ihya ulum ad-din. 4 vols.
Bulaq, 128 9 h./1872-73 .
H A1i ibn Uthma n al-Hujwiri . The "Kashf al-Mahjub,"
the Oldest  Persian Treatise on Sufism by al-Hujwiri.
xiii

--- Page 15 ---
xiv / ABBREVIATION S
Translated b y Reynol d A. Nicholson . Gibb Memoria l
Series, no . 17. 1911. Reprint. London , 1959.
IK Khwaj a Mir Dard. Ilm ul-kitab . Bhopal, 1309 h./1891 –
92.
K Abu Bakr Muhamma d al-Kalabadhi . The Doctrine  of
the Sufis. Translate d by A. J. Arberry . Cambridge , 1935.
L Abu Nasr as-Sarraj. Kita b al-luma fit-tasawwuf . Edited
by Reynol d A. Nicholson . Leiden and London , 1914.
M Jalaluddi n Rumi . Mathnawi-i  manawi . Edited and
translated b y Reynol d A. Nicholson . 6 vols. London ,
1925-40. Volum e and line cited.
MC Jalaluddi n Rumi. Mathnawi-i  manawi . Commentar y
by Reynol d A. Nicholson . 2 vols. London , 1925-40 .
MM Marija n Mole. Les mystiques  musulmans.  Paris, 1965.
MT Fariduddi n Attar. Mantiq at-tayr. Edited by M. Jawad
Shakur. Tehran , 1962.
N Maulan a Abdurrahma n Jami. Nafahdt  al-uns.  Edited
by M. Tauhidipur . Tehran , 1336 sh./1957 .
NS Reynol d A. Nicholson . Studies  in Islamic  Mysticism.
1921. Reprint . Cambridge , 1967.
P Loui s Massignon . La passion  d'al-Hosayn  ibn Mansour
Al-Hallaj, martyr  mystique  de I'Islam execute a Bagdad
le 26 Mars 922. 2 vols. Paris, 1922.
Q Abul-Qasi m al-Qushayri . Ar-risala  fi ilm at-tasawwuf.
Cairo, 133 0 h./1912 .
QR Abul-Qasi m al-Qushayri . Ar-rasai l al-qushayriyya.  Ed-
ited and translate d by F. M. Hasan. Karachi , 1964.
R Hellmu t Ritter. Das Meer der Seele. Gott, Welt und
Mensch i n den Geschichten  Fariduddin  Attars. Leiden,
!955.
S Abul-Maj d Majdu d Sanai. Hadiqat  al-haqiqat  wa sha-
riat at-tariqat . Edited by Mudarri s Razawi . Tehran ,
1329 sh./1950 .
SD Abul-Maj d Majdu d Sanai. Diwan.  Edited by Mudarri s
Razawi. Tehran , 1341 sh./1962 .
T Fariduddi n Attar . Tadhkirat  al-auliya . Edited by
Reynold A . Nicholson . 2 vols. 1905-7. Reprint. Londo n
and Leiden , 1959.
U Fariduddi n Attar . Musibatname . Edited by N. Fisal.
Tehran, 133 8 sh./1959 .

--- Page 16 ---
ABBREVIATIONS / XV
V Fariduddi n Attar. Ushturname . Edited by Mahdi Mu-
haqqiq. Tehran , 1339 sh./1960 .
W Paul Nwyia, S.J. Exegèse coranique  et langage  mys-
tique. Beirut , 1970.
X Ali ibn Ahmad ad-Daylami . Sirat-i Ibn al-Hafif  ash-
ShirdzL Translate d by Junayd- i Shirazi. Edited by Anne-
marie Schimmel . Ankara, 1955.
Y Yunu s Emre. Divan, Edited b y Abdülbâk i Gölpinarh .
Istanbul, 1943 .

--- Page 17 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 18 ---
FOREWORD
To write about Sufism, or Islamic mysticism , is an al-
most impossibl e task. At the first step, a wide mountai n range ap-
pears befor e the eye—an d the longer the seeker pursues the path, the
more difficul t it seems to reach any goal at all. He may dwell in the
rose gardens o f Persian mystica l poetry or try to reach the icy peaks
of theosophi c speculations ; he may dwell in the lowland s of popu-
lar saint worship or drive his camel through the endless deserts
of theoretica l discourse s about the nature of Sufism, of God, and
of the world; or he may be content to have an all-aroun d glimpse
of the landscape , enjoying the beauty of some of the highest peaks
bathed in the sunligh t of early morning , or colored by the violet
haze of a cool evening . In any case, only the elect few will reach
the farthes t mountai n on which the mythica l bird, Simurgh , lives
—to understan d that they have reached only what was already in
themselves.
Thus, to set out and delineat e some main feature s of Sufism,
both historicall y and phenomenologically , will yield no result
that satisfie s everybody : it is easy to overloo k certain aspects and
give too much weight to others. The amoun t of oriental and occi-
dental literatur e existen t in print and in manuscrip t is beyond
counting, s o that even from this viewpoin t a full account is not
to be achieved .
xvii

--- Page 19 ---
xviii / FOREWOR D
Yet, my students at Harvard have urged me to put together the
notes tha t formed the basis of several courses on Sufism—note s
that consis t both of literary evidenc e and of persona l experience s
with numerou s friends in the Islamic East, mainly in Turkey and
in Pakistan . My thanks are due to all of those who have helped
me—be it only by casual remarks—t o formulat e my ideas about
Sufism an d to those who took part in the growth of this book.
I wish to thank especiall y Dr. Charles Forman of Wheaton Col-
lege, Norton , Massachusetts , who was kind enough to go through
the manuscrip t to polish it from the linguisti c standpoin t and to
suggest som e simplifications .
With specia l gratitude I acknowledg e a generous subsidy from the
Ozai-Durrani Funds , Harvard University , which was given in sup-
port of the exploratio n of Indo-Musli m culture containe d in this
book.
My mothe r has, during many years, and especiall y during the
period of final typing, shown the virtues of patience and love, which
are so typical of the true Sufi; she never failed to encourag e me
in my work.
ANNEMARIE S C H I M M E L

--- Page 20 ---
THE ARABI C ALPHABE T
AND NOT E ON TRANSCRIPTIO N
There is no single, commonl y accepte d system of trans-
literating language s written in Arabic characters . Furthermore , the
transcription syste m change s accordin g to the language s concerned ;
thus, an Arabic d would be a z in Persian , a z in Modern Turkish .
European scholar s have used a wide variety of transcriptio n sys-
tems, and one of the main problem s is posed by the transliteratio n
of orienta l names into a Western alphabet . Throughou t this book
the generall y accepte d America n transcriptio n system has been
used. In the followin g list the other possible transcription s of each
letter hav e been indicate d after the semicolon . T means "moder n
Turkish alphabet. "
Letter in
basic formNumerical
value
1
2
4OO
500
3
8
600
4
700
200
7
60
300
90
800Name and  transcription
alif: a, , carrier of the
initial vowel .
ba: b
ta: t
tha: th; t; T: s
jim: ; , dj, dsch; T: c
ha: h; T: h
kha: kh; h, x; T: h
dal: d
dhal: dh; d; T: z
ra: r
zay: z
sin: s
shin: sh; s, sch; T: s
sad: s; s, c; T: s
dad: d; non-Arabic , z; T: z
xix

--- Page 21 ---
XX / THE ARABI C ALPHABE T
9
9OO
70
1OOO
80
100
20
3°40
50
5
6
10ta: t; T: t
za: z; z
ayn: , or unnotice d
ghayn: gh ; g, g; T: g
fa: f
qaf: q; k, k, gh; T: k
kaf: k
/am: 1
mim: m
nun: n
ha: h
waw: w; v, u, o, ou
ya: y; j,i, e.
The additional  Persian letters:
zha?: zh; j
cha: ch; c, tsch; T: c
pa:P
gaf:g
Urdu, Sindhi , Panjabi , and Pashto , as well as other Islamic lan-
guages of non-Arabi c origin, have added a number of letters and
diacritical mark s to secure the correct pronounciation .
The diphthongs , _,!, a-{-u, and a-\-y, jl, are transcribe d as aw, au,
o, ow, and ay, aj, ei, ej, respectively .
The thre e short vowels, which are not expresse d in writing , are
transcribed a s a, e; i, e; and u, o respectively .
P
--- Page 22 ---
THE MUSLI M YEA R
The Musli m year is a lunar year of 354 days, 1 2 months of
29 and 30 days. The calenda r begins with Muhammad' s emigratio n
from Mecc a to Medina in 622; thus the year 300 h.— 912-13 A.D., 600
-4 A.D., 1000 h. =1591-9 2 A.D., and 1300 h. = 1822-23 A.D.
Muharram: 10 , 'Ashura , the memorial  of Husayn  ibn
'All's death  at Kerbela on 10 Muharram  680 A.D.
Safar
Rablc ul-awwal : 12, birthday  of the Prophet.
Rabic ath-thani : 11, anniversary  of 'Abdifl-Qadir  Gildnl.
Jumada al-ul a
Jumada al-akhir a
Rajab: a t the beginning,  raga ib-mg/zt o (conception  of
the Prophet).  27, miraj, the Prophet's  ascension  to Heaven.
Shaban: 14-15,  shab-i barat, when the destinies  are fixed
for the coming year.
Ramadan: th e month of fasting. In one of the last three
odd nights—  generally  thought  to be the twenty-seventh—  the laylat
ul-qadr, during  which the Koran was revealed  for the first time.
Shawwal: begins  with the id ul-fitr, the feast of breaking
the fasting.
Dhul-Qada
Dhu'l-Hijja: th e month of Pilgrimage  to Mecca (hajj).
From the tenth to the twelfth, the ld ul-adha , Feast of Sacrifices.
xxi

--- Page 23 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 24 ---
MYSTICAL DIMENSION S OF ISLA M

--- Page 25 ---
Glory to God Who has not vouchsafed  to His
creatures any  means of attaining  unto knowledge
of Him except through impotence  to attain
unto knowledge  of Him.
Somebody asked  Abu Hafs: "Who is a Sufi?"
He answered:
"A Sufi does not ask who a Sufi is."

--- Page 26 ---
i. WHA T IS SUFISM ?
In recent years many books have been publishe d on
Sufism an d the spiritua l life in Islam. Each of them has touched
upon a different facet, for the phenomeno n usually called Sufism
is so broad and its appearanc e so protean that nobody can venture
to describ e it fully. Like the blind men in Rumi's famous story,
when the y were made to touch an elephant , each describe d it ac-
cording t o the part of the body his hands had touched : to one the
elephant appeare d like a throne, to anothe r like a fan, or like a
water pipe , or like a pillar. But none was able to imagin e what the
whole anima l would look like (M 3:1259-68). 1
Such is the case with Sufism, the generall y accepte d name for
Islamic mysticism . To approac h its partial meaning we have to ask
ourselves first , what mysticism  means. That mysticism  contains
something mysterious , not to be reached by ordinar y means or by
intellectual effort , is understoo d from the root commo n to the
words mystic  and mystery,  the Greek myein,  "to close the eyes."
i. See Fritz Meier, "Zur Geschicht e der Legend e von den Blinden und dem Elefan -
ten," in "Das Problem der Natur im esoterische n Monismu s des Islams, " Eranos-
Jahrbuch 1 4 (1946): 174. "The Blind Men and the Elephant, " a Hindu fable by John
Godfrey Saxe . Shah Wallulla h of Dehli speaks of the blind who tried to describe a tree
according t o the part their hands touched ; see Shah Wallullah , Lamafydt,  ed. Ghulam
Mustafa Qasim i (Hyderabad , Sind, n.d.), p. 4.
3

--- Page 27 ---
4 / WHAT IS SUFISM?
Mysticism ha s been called "the great spiritual current which goes
through al l religions. " In its widest sense it may be defined as the
consciousness o f the One Reality—b e it called Wisdom , Light,
Love, or Nothing. 2
Such definitions , however , merely point our way. For the reality
that is the goal of the mystic, and is ineffable , cannot be under-
stood or explaine d by any normal mode of perception ; neither
philosophy no r reason can reveal it. Only the wisdom of the heart,
gnosis, ma y give insight into some of its aspects. A spiritual experi-
ence that depends upon neither sensual nor rational method s is
needed. Onc e the seeker has set forth upon the way to this Last
Reality, h e will be led by an inner light. This light become s
stronger a s he frees himself from the attachment s of this world
or—as the Sufis would say—polishe s the mirror of his heart. Only
after a long period of purification—th e via purgativa  of Christian
mysticism—will h e be able to reach the via illuminativa,  where he
becomes endowe d with love and gnosis. From there he may reach
the last goal of all mystica l quest, the unio mystica. This may be
experienced an d expresse d as loving union, or as the visio beatifica,
in which the spirit sees what is beyond all vision, surrounde d by
the primordia l light of God; it may also be describe d as the "lifting
of the veil of ignorance, " the veil that covers the essentia l identity
of God and His creatures .
Mysticism ca n be defined as love of the Absolute—fo r the power
that separate s true mysticis m from mere asceticis m is love. Divine
love make s the seeker capable of bearing, even of enjoying , all the
pains and affliction s that God shower s upon him in order to test
him and to purify his soul. This love can carry the mystic's heart
to the Divine Presenc e "like the falcon which carries away the
prey," separatin g him, thus, from all that is created in time.
One can find these essentiall y simple ideas in every type of mys-
ticism. Th e mystics of all religions have tried to symboliz e their ex-
periences i n three differen t groups of images: The never-endin g
quest for God is symbolize d in the "Path" on which the "way-
farer" has to proceed , as in the numerou s allegorie s dealing with
Pilgrim's Progres s or the Heavenl y Journey . The transformatio n
2. The best introduction to mysticism is still Evelyn Underbill, Mysticism:  A Study
in the Nature  and Development  of Man's Spiritual  Consciousness  (1911; paperback ed.,
New York, 1956) .

--- Page 28 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / 5
of the soul through tribulatio n and painful purificatio n is often
expressed i n the imagery of alchemy or similar processe s from
nature an d prescientifi c science: the age-old dream of producin g
gold from base material is realized on the spiritua l level. Eventual -
ly, the nostalgi a of the lover and the longing for union was ex-
pressed b y symbols taken from human love; often a strange and
fascinating combinatio n of human and divine love permeate s the
verses of the mystics.
Notwithstanding similaritie s of descriptio n of mystica l experi-
ences, it is advisabl e to distinguis h between two main types, which
have been classifie d as Mysticis m of Infinity and Mysticis m of
Personality. Th e former type has found its highest and purest
expression i n the system of Plotinus and in the Upanishads , par-
ticularly a s elaborate d in Shankara' s advaita philosophy . Sufism
comes clos e to it in some of the forms develope d by the Ibn cArabi
school. Here , the Numen is conceive d as the Being beyond all
being, or even as the Not-Being , because it cannot be describe d
by any of the categorie s of finite thought ; it is infinite, timeless ,
spaceless, th e Absolut e Existence , and the Only Reality . By con-
trast the world possesse s only a "limited reality," which derives
its conditione d existenc e from the Absolut e Existenc e of the Di-
vine. It may be symbolize d as the boundles s ocean in which the
individual sel f vanishes like a drop, or as the desert, which shows
itself in ever new sand dunes that hide its depths, or as the water
out of which the world is crystallize d like ice. This type of mys-
ticism wa s often attacke d by prophet s and reformers , because it
seemed to deny the value of the human personalit y and to result
in pantheis m or monism , thus constitutin g the greatest threat to
personal responsibility . The idea of continuou s emanatio n in
contrast t o the unique divine act of creation was considered , by
both Musli m and Christia n mystics , to be incompatibl e with the
Biblico-Koranic ide a of a creatio ex nihilo. In the so-calle d Mys-
ticism of Personality , the relation between man and God is per-
ceived as that of creature and Creator , of a slave in the presenc e of
his Lord, or of a lover yearning for his Beloved . This type is more
commonly foun d in earlier Sufism.
These two types of mystical experience , however , are rarely met
with in their purest forms. Especiall y in mystica l poetry, an author
may describ e God in terminolog y taken from a pure love relation

--- Page 29 ---
6 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
and a few lines later use languag e that lends itself to an exclusivel y
"pantheistic" interpretation .
A differentiatio n betwee n the "voluntaristic " and the "gnostic "
approaches t o mystica l experienc e is somewha t easier. The mystic
of the voluntaristi c type wants to "qualify himself with the quali-
ties of God," as the Propheti c traditio n says, and to unite his own
will completel y with God's will, thus eventuall y overcomin g the
theoretical difficultie s posed by the dilemm a of predestinatio n and
free will. This mysticis m can be seen as a practical life process. The
mystic of the gnostic type strives for a deeper knowledg e of God:
he attempt s to know the structur e of His universe or to interpre t
the degree of His revelations—althoug h no mystic could ever dare
to "know " His Essence . Did not Dhu Dn-Nun (d . 859), usually re-
garded as one of the founders of speculations about mcfrifa, or
gnosis, war n his fellow mystics : "To ponder about the Essence of
God is ignorance , and to point to Him is associationis m (shirk],
and real gnosis is bewilderment " (N 34)? Despite this bewilder -
ment, the gnostic approac h often led to the building of theosoph -
ical system s with its adherent s tending to interpre t every aspect
of mysticis m in the light of their own particula r theories , some-
times eve n denying the simple experienc e of loving submission .
In Islami c mysticism , both aspects are equally strong, and in later
periods the y are intermingled .
In their formativ e period, the Sufis admitte d of a twofold ap-
proach to God. As Hujwiri (d. circa 1071) says in his discussio n of
the states of "intimacy " and "respect" :
There is a differenc e between one who is burned by His Majesty in the
fire of love and one who is illuminate d by His Beauty in the light of
contemplation. ( H 367)
There is a differenc e between one who meditate s upon the Divine acts
and one who is amazed at the Divine Majesty ; the one is a follower of
friendship, th e other is a companio n of love. (H 373)
One migh t also recall the distinctio n made by Jam! in speakin g of
the two types of advance d Sufis: some are those
to whom the Primordia l Grace and Lovingkindnes s has granted salva-
tion after their being submerge d in complet e union and in the wave of
tauhid [unification] , [taking them out] of the belly of the fish "Anni-
hilation" o n the shore of separatio n and in the arena of permanen t sub-
sistence, s o that they might lead the people towards salvation .
The other s are those who are completel y submerge d in the ocean of

--- Page 30 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / 7
Unity and have been so completel y naughte d in the belly of the fish
"Annihilation" tha t never a news or trace comes to the shore of separa-
tion and the directio n of subsistenc e . . . and the sanctity of perfectin g
others is not entrusted to them. (N 8-9)
The distinctio n that modern history of religion s makes between
the so-calle d "prophetic " and the "mystic " spirit is clearly visible
in Jami's descriptio n of the two types of mystics—thos e who prac-
tice complet e reclusio n (Weltabkehr)  and are solely concerne d
with their own salvatio n in the first "flight of the one toward the
One," and those who return from their mystical experienc e in a
higher, sanctifie d state of mind and are able to lead other people
on the right path.
Approaches t o the phenomeno n "Sufism " are manifold . To an-
alyze the mystica l experienc e itself is next to impossibl e since
words can never plumb the depths of this experience . Even the
finest psychologica l analysis is limited; words remain on the shore,
as the Sufis would say. It would be easier to understan d Sufism
through a n analysis of given structures : the French scholar Henry
Corbin, in his book on Ibn 'Arabl, has shown to what depths such
a study of structur e underlyin g a specific mystical-philosophica l
system ca n lead. Analyse s of the languag e of mysticis m and the
development o f the "mystica l lexicon" (Louis Massigno n and,
more recently , Paul Nwyia) can help illuminat e the formativ e
period of Sufi thought . The study of symbols and images used by
the mystic s and of the degree of their interdependenc e belongs to
this field; it opens the way to an examinatio n of the contributio n
of Sufism to the developmen t of Islamic languages , literatures , and
arts.
Since Sufis m is to a very large extent built upon the principl e of
the disciple' s initiation , the differen t methods of spiritua l educa-
tion, the exercise s practice d in the Sufi orders, the psychologica l
phases of the progress , the formatio n of orders, and their sociologi -
cal and cultura l role are rewardin g fields of research . Of prime
importance her e are the penetratin g studies of the Swiss scholar
Fritz Meier .
European scholar s have responde d to the phenomeno n of Is-
lamic mysticis m in differen t ways, as can be understoo d from these
remarks. Europe' s first contact with Sufi ideas can be traced back
to the Middle Ages: the works of the Catalania n mystic and scholar
Ramon Lul l (d. 1316) show a remarkabl e influenc e of Sufi litera-

--- Page 31 ---
8 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
ture.3 The first figure from the history of Sufism to be introduce d
into Europea n literatur e was Rabi ca al-cAdawiyya, th e great wom-
an saint of the eighth century ; her legend was brought to Europe by
Joinville, th e chancello r of Louis IX, in the late thirteent h century .
Rabica's figur e was used in a seventeenth-centur y French treatise on
pure love as a model of Divine love, 4 and her story has been retold
more tha n once in the West, the latest echo being a contemporar y
German shor t story (Max Mell, "Die schonen Hande") .
Travelers wh o visited the Near and Middle East in the sixteent h
and seventeent h centurie s brough t back informatio n about rites
of the dervishes , with both the ritual dance of the Whirlin g Der-
vishes (Mevlevis ) and the strange performance s of the Howlin g
Dervishes (Rifa ci's) attractin g casual visitors. In 1638 the learned
Fabricius o f Rostock Universit y edited and translated , for the first
time, a poem by the great Egyptia n mystic Ibn al-Farid (d. 1235).
Most of the informatio n about orienta l spirituality , however ,
was derive d from the translation s of Persian classica l poetry—
Sacdi's Gulistdn  has been one of the favorit e books of Europea n
intellectuals sinc e Adam Oleariu s produce d its first complet e trans-
lation int o German in 1651. A century later, Sir William Jones at
Fort William , Calcutta , fostered the study of Persian poetry ,
among othe r subjects , and as a result the first translation s of Hafiz
became availabl e in the West. His ideas about Sufi poetry have
influenced man y English-speakin g orientalists , althoug h one may
find, in some works on Sufism written during the nineteent h cen-
tury, rathe r absurd views in wild confusion . Hafiz's poetica l imag-
ery—unfortunately mostl y taken at face value—ha s largely colored
the Wester n image of Sufism.
In the nineteenth century , historica l sources and importan t Sufi
texts wer e made availabl e in print both in the Middle East and
in Europe , so that scholars could begin to form their own ideas
about the origin and early developmen t of Sufism. Yet most of the
sources availabl e were of rather late origin and rarely containe d
reliable informatio n about the earliest stages of the mystica l move-
ment in Islam. That is why the interpreter s usually agreed that
Sufism mus t be a foreign plant in the sandy desert of Islam, the
3. Annemari e Schimmel , "Raymundu s Lullus und seine Auseinandersetzun g mil
dem Islam, " Eine Heilige Kirche, fasc. i (1953-54) .
4. Henri Bremond , Histoire  du sentiment  religieux  en France,  vol. 9 (Paris, 1928).

--- Page 32 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / Q
religion tha t was so little known and even less appreciate d and that
could not possibly be related to any finer and higher spiritua l
movement.5
A Germa n professo r of Divinity , F. A. D. Tholuck , produce d
the first comprehensiv e book on Sufism in 1821, called Ssufismus
sive theosophia  persarum  pantheistica,  and four years later an
anthology calle d Bluthensammlung  aus der Morgenldndischen
Mystik. Amazingl y enough , Tholuck—himsel f a good Protestan t
and therefor e not at all prone to mystica l ideas—understoo d that
"the Sufi doctrine was both generate d and must be illustrate d out
of Muhammad' s own mysticism. " This statemen t is all the more
surprising i n view of the miscellaneou s characte r of the manu-
scripts an d printed books at his disposal. 6
During th e followin g decades , several theories about the origin
of Sufism were brough t forth, as A. J. Arberry has shown in his
useful boo k An Introduction  to the History of Sufism. 7 It will suf-
fice to mention a few of those theories .
E. H. Palmer, in his Oriental  Mysticism  (1867), held that Sufism
is "the developmen t of the Primaeva l religion of the Aryan race" 8
—a theory not unknow n to some German writers during the Nazi
5. Basic sources are: A. J. Arberry , Sufism: An Account  of the Mystics  of Islam (Lon-
don, 1950) , which deals with the history of the classica l period of Sufism; Marija n
Mole, Le s mystiques  musulmans  (Paris, 1965), the best short introductio n to Sufism , its
history an d meaning ; G.-C. Anawat i and Louis Gardet , Mystique  musulmane  (Paris,
1961), a fine study of the early period of Sufism and of Sufi practices , mainly dhikr,
"recollection," a s seen by Catholi c theologians . See also Louis Gardet , Experiences
mystiques e n terres nonchretiennes  (Paris, 1953). Cyprian Rice, O. P., The Persian
Sufis, ad ed. (London , 1969), is a lovable and understandin g bookle t about mystica l
experience. Frit z Meier, Vom Wesen der islamischen  Mystik (Basel, 1943), is a small
but weight y book that stresses the importanc e of initiatio n in Sufism ; it contain s rich
source material . Seyyed H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities  of Islam (London , 1966; New
York, 1967) , contain s a number of importan t remark s about the Irania n aspect of
Sufism, whic h is dealt with more fully in the same author' s Sufi Essais (London , 1972).
Inayat Khan , The Sufi Message,  which has been reprinte d many times, is a modern
and subjective , yet impressiv e interpretation . Idries Shah, The Sufis, as well as his
other books , should be avoided by serious students .
6. Friedric h Augus t Deofidu s Tholuck , Ssufismus  sive theosophia  persarum  pan-
theistica (Berlin , 1821), and the same author' s Bluthensammlung  aus der Morgen-
landischen Mystik  (Berlin , 1825), are still quite revealing .
7. The history of Sufi studies in Europe has been discusse d by A. J. Arberry in An
Introduction t o the History  of Sufism (London , 1942).
8. E. H. Palmer , Oriental  Mysticism:  A Treatise  on Suftstic  and Unitarian  Theos-
ophy of the Persians  (1867; reprint ed., London , 1969), is immatur e but has some good
points; Joh n P. Brown, The Dervishes  (1868; reprint ed., London , 1968), gives much
important material , though it is not scholarly .

--- Page 33 ---
10 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
period. In any case, Sufism has often been considere d a typically
Iranian developmen t inside Islam. There is no doubt that certain
important Irania n element s have survive d through the ages be-
neath its surface, as both Henri Corbin and Seyyed H. Nasr have
recently emphasized. 9
Many eminen t scholars , mainly in Great Britain, have stressed
the importanc e of Neoplatoni c influence s upon the developmen t
of Sufism . Nobody would deny that Neoplatonis m had deeply
permeated th e Near East—th e so-calle d "Theolog y of Aristotle "
(which is, in fact, Porphyry' s commentar y on Plotinus' s Enneads]
was translate d into Arabic as early as 840. Neoplatonis m was "in
the air," as Reynold A. Nicholso n pointed out in the famous in-
troduction t o his selection from Jalaluddi n Rumi's lyrical poetry
in 1898—th e first book in the long list of his still unrivale d publica-
tions in the field of Sufism. 10 Nicholson , however , understoo d that
the early ascetic movemen t can be explaine d withou t difficultie s
from its Islamic roots and that, therefore , the origina l form of
Sufism is "a native product of Islam itself." Since Islam grew out
of a soil in which ancient oriental , Neoplatonic , and Christia n
influences wer e strong, a number of secondar y influence s may have
worked upo n Islam even in its earliest phase.
It is only natural that the Christia n influence s should have in-
terested man y Europea n scholar s (Adalber t Merx, Arend Jan
Wensinck, Margare t Smith), 11 who mainly tried to explore the
relations o f Muslim s with the Syrian monks. The best studies in
this field have been written by the Swedish Bishop Tor Andrae ,
to whom we also owe the classica l discussio n of the veneratio n of
the Prophe t Muhamma d in mystica l Islam. 12
The proble m of influence s become s more difficult when one
thinks of the relation s with religiou s tradition s outside the Near
9. See also Emil Brogelmann , Die religiosen  Erlebnisse  der persischen  Mystiker
(Hannover, 1932) ; a short survey is given by A. H. Zarrinkoob , "Persia n Sufism in Its
Historical Perspective, " Iranian  Studies 3 (1970): 3—4.
10. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Mystics  of Islam (1914; reprint ed., Chester Springs ,
Pa., 1962) , is still a classic, though it is outdate d at certain places. His Studies  in Is-
lamic Mysticism  (1921; reprint ed., Cambridge , 1967), contain s three excellen t studies
on outstandin g personalitie s (Abu Sacld, Ibn al-Farid . Jill); and his The Idea of Per-
sonality i n Sufism (Cambridge , 1923) is a collectio n of lectures .
11. Adalber t Merx, Ideen und Grundlinien  einer allgemeinen  Geschichte  der Mys-
tik (Heidelberg , 1893). Arend Jan Wensinck , Abu^l-farag  Bar hebreaus,  The Book of
the Dove (Leiden, 1919).
12. Tor Andrae , I Myrtentrddgdrden  (Uppsala , 1947). For his other works see the
Bibliography.

--- Page 34 ---
WHAT IS SUFISM? / 11
Eastern world. 13 Many scholars were, and some still are, inclined
to accept Indian influence s on the formativ e period of Sufism, be-
ginning wit h Alfred von Kremer (1868) and Reinhar t P. Dozy
(1869). Bu t even Max Horten' s numerou s articles in this field
could not bring any stringen t proof of such influences 14 in the
early period ; for later times, the situatio n is slightly different. 15
For the earliest period, influence s from Turkesta n are much
more important , as Richard Hartman n has shown; Ignaz Goldzi-
her had already pointed out parallel tradition s in Islamic mystica l
tales and Buddhis t stories, but this kind of parallelis m can be
easily trace d back to the commo n sources , e.g., the Indian fables
of the Hitopades a and Panchatantra , which were translate d into
the Near Eastern language s before and shortly after the advent of
Islam. An d the miracles of saints are the same all over the world.
The Turkestan i contributio n is, however , highlighte d in our day
by some Turkish mystics who show a tendency of speakin g of a
typically "Turkish " type of mysticis m that comprise s a strict Mys-
ticism of Infinity, which describe s God as "positiv e Not-Being. "
But such generalization s are dangerous .
Even the rather far-fetche d possibilit y of early Chinese—i.e. ,
Taoist—influences o n Sufism has been discusse d (first by Omar
Farrukh). Fo r the later period, the Japanes e scholar Toshihik o
Izutsu has drawn some interestin g parallel s between Taoist struc-
tures of thought and Ibn cArabi's mystica l system. 16
The study of a single mystic's life and work can occupy a scholar
throughout hi s life: Louis Massignon' s research into the person-
ality of al-Hallaj , the "martyr of divine love," is the best example
for this approach ; Hellmu t Ritter's masterl y book on cAttar, Da s
13. See Ignaz Goldziher , "Materialie n zur Entwicklungsgeschicht e des Sufismus, "
Wiener Zeitschrift  fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes  13 (1899). Reynold A. Nicholson ,
"A Historica l Enquiry concernin g the Origin and Developmen t of Sufism, " Journal  of
the Royal  Asiatic Society, 1906, p. 303; Richard Hartmann , "Zur Frage nach der Her-
kunft un d den Anfange n des Sufitums, " Der Islam 6 (1915); Annemari e Schimmel ,
"The Origi n and Early Developmen t of Sufism, " Journal  of the Pakistan  Historical
Society, 1958 .
14. Max Horten , Indische  Stromungen  in der islamischen  Mystik (Heidelberg ,
1927-28); lik e his article "Der Sinn der islamische n Mystik, " Scientia,  July 1927, this
book shoul d be used with caution .
15. Rober t C. Zaehner , Hindu and Muslim  Mysticism  (London , 1960), is well docu-
mented an d thought-provoking , though it overstresse s the Indian elements .
16. Omar Farrukh , At-tasawwuf  fPl-Islam  (Beirut, 1957). For parallel s see Toshihik o
Izutsu, A  Comparative  Study of the Key Philosophical  Concepts  of Sufism and Taoism,
2 vols. (Tokyo, 1966-67) .

--- Page 35 ---
12 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
Meer der Seele (The Ocean of the Soul), is the result of an ideal
combination o f strict philolog y combine d with aestheti c and re-
ligious understanding . On the other hand, an investigatio n of a
particular mystica l attitude, like Benedik t Reinert' s study of tawak-
kul, "trus t in God," reveals the various facets of one single stage
of the Path and sheds light on many kindred problems .
Whether w e concentrat e upon the history of Sufism, by using a
vertical cut , or upon its methods , expressions , and experiences , by
taking a cross section, the main problem is the fact that previousl y
unknown manuscript s frequentl y come to light. 17 The librarie s
of the Islamic countries , and those in the West, still contain many
works tha t may shed new light upon any of the problem s at stake.
Even now there is so much materia l availabl e in the differen t
languages o f Islam that any generalizatio n seems impossible. 18
That is why this book can give only a glimpse of a few aspects of
Sufism; eve n this will, probably , be tinged by a personal predilec -
tion for mystica l poetry derived from the large area of Iranian
cultural influence .
How did the Sufis themselve s interpre t the meaning of the word
Sufism?
In interpretin g Islamic mystica l texts, one must not forget that
many saying s to which we give a deep theologica l or philosophica l
meaning ma y have been intende d to be suggestiv e wordplay ; some
of the definition s found in the classical texts may have been uttered
17. For this problem see Fritz Meier, "Ein wichtige r Handschriftenfun d zur Sunk,"
Oriens 20 (1967).
18. As an antidot e to the large amount of Arabic and Persian sources , one should
consult Ib n al-Jauzi , Talbts Iblls (Cairo, 1340 h./1921-22) , translate d by David Samuel
Margoliouth a s "The Devil's Delusion, " Islamic Culture 12 (1938), a poisonou s book
attacking th e degeneratio n of Sufism in the twelfth century . Oriental scholars have
published a  number of general studies on the history of Sufism in the last twenty years,
during whic h there has been a growing interest in the spiritua l life of Islam. Abu3!-
cAla3 cAffifi, At-tasawwuf:  ath-thaurat  ar-ruhiyya  fPl-Islam  [Sufism, the Spiritua l
Revolution i n Islam] (Cairo, 1963); Muhamma d Mustafa Hilmi, Al-haydt  ar-ruhiyya
fPl-Islam [Spiritua l Life in Islam] (Cairo, 1954); M. Qasim GhanI, Ta^rlkh-i  tasawwuf
dar Islam [History of Sufism in Islam] (Tehran , 1330 sh./ig5i) . Among the anthologie s
of Sufi texts produce d in the West, the followin g useful collection s should be men-
tioned: Johanne s Pedersen , Muhammedansk  mystik (Copenhagen , 1923); Margare t
Smith, Readings  from the Mystics of Islam (London, 1950); Margare t Smith, The Sufi
Path of Love (London , 1954); Martino Mario Moreno , Antologia  della Mistica Arabo-
Persiana (Bari , Italy, 1951); fimile Dermenghem , Vies des saints musulmans  (Algiers,
1942); Virgini a Vacca, Vite e detti di Santi Musulmani  (Torino, n.d.). Specialize d
studies an d anthologie s will be mentione d in relevan t places.

--- Page 36 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / 13
by the Sufi masters as a sort of ko^an, a paradox meant to shock the
hearer, to kindle discussion , to perplex the logical faculties , and
thus to engende r a nonlogica l understandin g of the real meaning
of the word concerned , or of the mystica l "state" or "stage" in
question. Th e resolutio n of apparent contradiction s in some of these
sayings migh t be found, then, in an act of illumination . This is
at least one possible explanatio n of the fact that the masters give
many differen t answers to the same question . This "willful para-
dox" and "pious highfalutin " was perhaps "intende d to make their
flesh creep a little for their health's sake," as W. H. Temple Gaird-
ner puts it, who with full right asks: "Do we not take their lan-
guage too seriously ? It parades as scientific ; it is really poetico -
rhetorical."19 Indeed , one aspect of mystica l languag e in Sufism
that shoul d never be overlooke d is the tendenc y of the Arabs to
play with words. The structur e of the Arabic language—buil t upon
triliteral roots—lend s itself to the developin g of innumerabl e word
forms followin g almost mathematica l rules. It might be likened
to the structur e of an arabesqu e that grows out of a simple geo-
metric patter n into complicate d multiangle d stars, or out of a
flower moti f into intricat e lacework . A tendency to enjoy these
infinite possibilitie s of the languag e has greatly influence d the
style of Arabic poets and prose writers, and in many sayings of the
Sufis one can detect a similar joy in linguisti c play; the author in-
dulges in derivin g differen t meaning s from one root, he loves
rhymes an d strong rhythmica l patterns—feature s inherite d by the
mystics of  the Persian, Turkish , and Indo-Musli m tongues . But
this almos t magical interpla y of sound and meaning , which con-
tributes s o much to the impressivenes s of a sentence in the Islamic
languages, i s lost in translation . So also are the numerou s hidden
allusions inheren t in every root of the Arabic tongue, which point
to the whole range of historical , theological , and poetica l experi-
ences that may have been present in the mind of the author of an
apparently simpl e statemen t or an easy-flowin g verse.
Another proble m is posed by the fondnes s of many Sufi authors
for inventin g classifications , usually tripartite , to define certain
mystical states ; they often press the meanin g of a word rather than
explain it . The titles of the books compose d by Sufis, particularl y
19. W. H. Templ e Gairdner , Al-Ghazzdll's  "Mishkat  al-anwdr":  The Niche for
Lights (London , 1915), p. 71.

--- Page 37 ---
14 / WHAT IS SUFISM?
in the postclassica l centuries , show the same peculiarities ; they
allude to mystica l states, to technica l expressions , and often contain
in themselve s a whole spiritua l program ; other authors may give,
by the numerica l value of the title, the date of its composition .
What, then , did the Sufis say about the origin of the name
tasawwuf, whic h we translat e as Sufism (or, the older form, Sufi-
ism)?
Their definition s go back to the earliest period and thus defy
the tendenc y of some modern Wester n writers to apply this name
only to the later "theosophical " aspect of Islamic mysticism . Some
of the pious would even ask the Prophe t when he blessed them
with his appearanc e in their dreams : "What is Sufism? " (N 255)
Hujwlri, i n the mid-elevent h century , summed up the discussion :
Some asser t that the Sufi is so called because he wears a woollen garment
(jama-i suf),  others that he is so called because he is in the first rank
(saff-i awwal],  others say it is because the Sufis claim to belong to the
ashdb-i Suffa  (the people of the Bench who gathere d around the Proph-
et's mosque) . Others, again, declare that the name is derived from safd
(purity). ( H 30)
Another—Western—definition, namel y the derivatio n from
Greek sophos,  "wise," is philologicall y impossible . The derivatio n
from suf,  "wool," is now generall y accepted—th e coarse woolen
garment o f the first generatio n of Muslim ascetic s was their dis-
tinguishing mark . KalabadhI , one of the early theoretica l writers
on Sufism (d. ca. 990), says in this respect:
Those wh o relate them to the Bench and to wool express the outward
aspect of their conditions : for they were people who had left this world,
departed fro m their homes, fled from their companions . They wandere d
about the land, mortifyin g the carnal desires, and making naked the
body; they took of this world's good only so much as is indispensabl e for
covering th e nakednes s and allaying hunger. (K 5)
But Sufis m is more. Junayd, the undispute d leader of the Iraqian
school of mysticis m (d. 910), wrote: "Sufism is not [achieved ] by
much prayin g and fasting , but it is the securit y of the heart and
the generosit y of the soul" (QR 60). Junayd is also credite d with
a definitio n in which he sees the prototype s of the Sufis in the
prophets a s mentione d in the Koran (in later times the ascent
through th e differen t stages of the prophets , or the identificatio n
with the spirit of one of them, is one aspec t of certain Sufi schools) :
Sufism is founded on eight qualitie s exemplifie d in eight apostles: the
generosity o f Abraham , who sacrifice d his son; the acquiescenc e of Ish-
mael, who submitte d to the comman d of God and gave up his dear life;

--- Page 38 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / 15
the patienc e of Job, who patientl y endured the affliction s of worms and
the jealous y of the Merciful ; the symbolis m of Zacharias , to whom God
said "Tho u shalt not speak unto men for three days save by signs" (Sura
3:36) and again to the same effect "When he called upon his Lord with a
secret invocation " (Sura 19:2); the strangerhoo d of John, who was a
stranger in his own country and an alien to his own kind amongs t whom
he lived; the pilgrimhoo d of Jesus, who was so detache d therein from
worldly thing s that he kept only a cup and a comb—th e cup he threw
away whe n he saw a man drinkin g in the palms of his hand, and the
comb likewis e when he saw another man using his fingers instead of a
comb; the wearing of wool by Moses, whose garmen t was woollen ; and
the povert y of Muhammed , to whom God Almight y sent the key of all
treasures tha t are upon the face of the earth, saying, "Lay no trouble on
thyself, bu t procure every luxury by means of these treasures, " and he
answered, " O Lord, I desire them not; keep me one day full fed and one
day hungry. " (H 39-40)
Some of Junayd' s contemporarie s emphasize d the ascetic side of
Sufism, a complete break with what is called "the world" and ego-
tism: "Sufis m is to possess nothing and to be possesse d by nothing "
(L*5).
"Sufism i s freedom and generosit y and absence of self-constraint "
(L 57). Ruwaym' s (d. 915) advice to young Ibn Khafif, "Sufism is
to sacrific e one's soul—bu t do not occupy yoursel f with the small-
talk of the Sufis!" (X 90) shows that the danger of talking too much
in a sort of technica l and quasi-esoteri c languag e was felt quite
early. Th e Sufi should rather insist upon "faithfulnes s with the
contract" ( N 226) and should be free, "neithe r tired by searchin g
nor disappointe d by deprivation " (L 25). "The Sufis are people who
prefer Go d to everythin g and God prefers them to everythin g else"
(L 25). Some decades after Dhu Dn-Nun (d . 859), who is credited
with the last sayings, Sahl at-Tustar i defined the Sufi: "It is he whose
blood is licit and whose propert y is allowed [i.e., he who can be
killed and whose propert y can be legally given to the faithful ] and
whatever h e sees, he sees it from God, and knows that God's loving-
kindness embrace s all creation " (B 370).
The socia l and practica l aspect of Sufism is understoo d from defi-
nitions lik e those of Junayd and Nurl, accordin g to whom "Sufism
is not compose d of practice s and sciences , but it is morals" (H 42),
and "who surpasse s you in good moral qualitie s surpasse s you in
Sufism" (N  311). It means to act accordin g to God's orders and
laws, whic h are understoo d in their deepest spiritua l sense with-
out denyin g their outward forms. This way of life is possible only
through lovin g devotion : "Sufism is the heart's being pure from
the pollutio n of discord"— a sentenc e which Hujwlr i (H 38) ex-

--- Page 39 ---
l6 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
plains as follows: "Love is concord , and the lover has but one
duty in the world, namely to keep the commandmen t of the be-
loved, and if the object of desire is one, how can discord arise?"
The Sufis have spoken of the threefol d meanin g of tasawwuf
according t o the sharl^a, the Muslim law, the tariqa, the mystica l
path, and the haqiqa,  the Truth. It is a purificatio n on differen t
levels, firs t from the lower qualities and the turpitud e of the soul,
then from the bondage of human qualities , and eventuall y a purifi-
cation and election on the level of attribute s (L 27-28).
But there are also warning s against "Sufism. " Shibli (d. 945), as
was so often the case, wanted to shock his audience when he asserted :
"Sufism is polytheism , because it is the guardin g of the heart from
the vision of the 'other,' and 'other' does not exist" (H 38). He thus
attacks the ascetic who closes his eyes to the created world and wants
to concentrat e exclusivel y upon God—bu t since God is the only
Reality, ho w can one think of "otherness " and so try to avoid it?
Therefore, " a true Sufi is he who is not," as Kharaqan i says, with a
paradox tha t has been repeated by other mystics (N 298, 225).
The Islami c mystics enjoyed the play with the root safd, "purity, "
when they discusse d Sufism and the qualitie s of the ideal Sufi: "He
that is purified by love is pure (sdfi), and he who is purified by the
Beloved i s a Sufi" (H 34), i.e., he who is completel y absorbe d in the
Divine Belove d and does not think of anythin g but Him has at-
tained the true rank of a Sufi. It is not surprisin g that the Sufis made
attempts t o designat e Adam as the first Sufi; for he was forty days
"in seclusion " (like the novice at the beginnin g of the Path) before
God endowe d him with spirit; then God put the lamp of reason in
his heart and the light of wisdom on his tongue, and he emerged like
an illuminate d mystic from the retiremen t during which he was
kneaded b y the hands of God. After his fall he performe d acts of
penitence i n India for 300 years until God "elected " him (istafd;
see Sura 3:25) so that he became pure (sdfT) and thus a true Sufi. 20
Even a poet who cannot be called exactly a mystic, namely Kha-
qanl, the greatest panegyris t of Iran (d. 1199), claims: "I am pure
since I am a servant of the purity of the Sufi"; and in one of the long
chains of oaths that he likes to insert in his qasldas he swears "by the
Sufis who love affliction s and are enemies of wellbeing. " He is thus
close to Rumi, who a century later defined Sufism in this way:
20. Qutbaddi n al-clbadi, At-tasfiya  ft ahwdl as-sufiyya,  or Sufmame,  ed. Ghulam
Muhammad Yusuf i (Tehran , 1347 sh./ig68) , p. 27.

--- Page 40 ---
WHAT IS SUFISM? / 17
"What is Sufism? He said: To find joy in the heart when grief
comes" (M 3:3261) . Khaqanl alluded to the Sufis
who carry in their waterbowl th e water of life, like Khidr,
and whose  rods are as miraculou s as the rod of Moses. 21
Later Persian , Turkish, and Urdu literatur e abounds in poems that
praise the wonderfu l qualities of this or that Sufi saint or describe
the miracle s worked by a mystical leader.
Sufism meant , in the formativ e period, mainly an interiorizatio n
of Islam, a personal experienc e of the central mystery of Islam, that
of tauhld,  "to declare that God is One." The Sufis always remaine d
inside the fold of Islam, and their mystical attitude was not limited
by their adherenc e to any of the legal or theologica l schools. They
could reac h their goal from any starting point—neithe r the differ-
ences betwee n the legal madhhabs  nor theologica l hairsplittin g was,
basically, o f interest to them. Hujwiri sums up the early Sufi atti-
tude towar d science and theolog y when he poignantl y observes :
"Knowledge i s immense and life is short: therefor e it is not obliga-
tory to learn all the science . . . but only so much as bears upon the
religious law " (H 11). That means: enough astronom y to find the
direction o f Mecca as require d for the correct performanc e of pray-
er, enough mathematic s to figure out the legal amount of alms one
has to pay—tha t is what the Sufi, like every good Muslim , should
know. For God has condemne d useless knowledg e (Sura 2:96), and
did not the Prophet say: "I take refuge with Thee from knowledg e
that profitet h naught" (H n)? 22 c//m, "knowledge, " the pursuit of
which is incumben t upon every male and female Muslim , is the
knowledge o f a Muslim's practica l duties: "Do not read Cz7ra excep t
for the true life. . . . Religious science is jurisprudenc e and exegesis
and tradition—whoeve r reads anythin g else, becomes abominable "
(U 54). True gnosis, namely the gnosis of the One, is not attained
through books , and many a legend tells how a Sufi who had reached ,
or though t he had reached , his goal threw away his books, for:
"Books, y e are excellen t guides, but it is absurd to trouble about a
guide afte r the goal has been reached " (NS 21).
"To break the ink-pots and to tear the books" was considere d by
some mystic s the first step in Sufism. The great saint cUmar Suhra -
wardi, wh o studied scholasti c theology in his youth, was blessed by
21. Khaqani , Diwan, ed. Sajjadi (Tehran , 1338 sh./i959) , qasida p. 250, 51, 369.
22. N 32 attribute d to Abu Hashim as-Sufi .

--- Page 41 ---
l8 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
a saint who put his hands on his chest and made him forget all he
had studied , "but he filled my breast with the cilm ladunni"  (Sura
18:65), th e "knowledg e immediatel y derived from God" (N 515).
cAbduDl-Qadir Gilan i performe d a miracle by suddenl y washin g
away the text of a philosoph y book he considere d dangerou s to his
disciple ( N 517); other Sufis were urged by dreams to cast their
precious collection s of books into a river (N 432).
This predilectio n for immediat e knowledg e as contraste d with
legalistic scholarshi p was expresse d in later times by many poets
and mystic s who ridicule d the founder s of the great law schools , es-
pecially Ab u Hanifa (d. 767) and Shafi ci (d. 820). Sanaa's verse (at-
tributed t o both cAttar [AD 100] and Rumi [D 498]) is a case in
point:
Abu Hanif a has not taught love,
Shafici ha s no tradition s about it.
(SD 605)
Sana5! (d . 1131) has often contraste d the Sufi with the Kufi, the
learned lawye r Abu Hanifa from Kufa, and still in eighteenth -
century Sindh i mystica l poetry the Sufi is called Id-kiifl, "non-
Kufi," i.e. , not bound to a particula r religiou s rite.23
The Sufis claimed that the whole wisdom was include d in the
letter alif,  the first letter in the alphabe t and symbol of God (see
Appendix i) . Are not many scholars who rely upon books "like the
donkey whic h carries books" (Sura 62:5)? Did not Noah live for
nine hundre d years, with only the recollectio n of God? And, as
Rumi add s with a slightly ironical bent, "he had not read the risdla
nor the Qut al-qulub"  (M 6:2652-53) , the two handbook s of mod-
erate Sufism . For althoug h the Sufis often condemne d the bookish -
ness of scholars and admonishe d their disciple s to "strive to lift the
veils, not to collect books," 24 it is a fact that they themselve s were
among th e most productiv e writers in Islamic history. And many
of their theoretica l works are no more readabl e or enjoyabl e than
the dogmati c treatises that they attacke d in their poems.
The main target of Sufi criticism was philosophy , influence d by
Greek thought : "There is nobody more distant from the law of the
23. For the whole comple x see Annemari e Schimmel , "Shah cAbdul Latlf' s Be-
schreibung de s wahren Sufi," in Festschrift  fur Fritz Meier, comp. Richard Gramlic h
(Wiesbaden, 1974) .
24. Maulan a cAbdurrahman Jami , LawcPih  (Tehran , 1342 sh./igGs) , no. 24, p. 40.

--- Page 42 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / ig
Hashimite prophe t than a philosopher " (U 54; see also MT 291),
says cAttar, echoin g Sanaa's sentiment s when he wrote:
From word s like "primar y matter" and "primar y cause"
you will not find the way into the Presenc e of the Lord. 25
The whol e "Universa l Reason" is nothing in the presenc e of a sin-
gle divine order, "Say!" (U 45)—a fine pun on hull, "universal, " and
qul, "say, " the divine address to the Prophet . The "little philoso -
pher" is both the laughin g stock and the scapegoa t for the mystics .
Strangely enough , Ibn Sma (Avicenna , d. 1037) has become the
representative o f dry rationalism , althoug h he was as much of a
mystical thinke r as some of those classifie d as Sufis. 26 Perhap s the
Sufi aversio n to him, though already visible in Sanaa's poetry (SD
57), was fostered by a story about Majduddl n Baghdad ! (d. 1219):
"He saw the prophe t in his dream and was informe d by him that
'Ibn Sina wanted to reach God withou t my mediation , and I veiled
him with my hand, and he fell into the fire' " (N 427).
Such an anti-intellectualism , as it was sensed by the orthodox ,
could lea d to dangers for the communa l life. One might mentio n
the type of the "wise idiot," 27 represente d in Islamic lore first by
Buhlul, a  strange characte r who lived during the caliphat e of Harun
ar-Rashid (d . 809). To him, as later to many unknow n and unname d
mentally derange d persons , are ascribed sayings in which they give
frank expressio n of their criticism of contemporar y life. But since
they were insane they escaped punishment : "God has freed them
from orde r and prohibition " (N 296). They are set free by God
from thei r normal state as "slaves" and live in perfect loving union
with Him , as c Attar points out (MT 245). The type of the majdhub,
the "enrapture d one" who, under the shock of a mystical vision o r
any psychologica l experience , is bereft of his senses and walks
around i n a fashion prohibite d by the religiou s law (i.e., stark
naked) belong s to the darker side of the Sufi world. Many a mystical
leader ha s complaine d about simpleton s who attracted , by their
strange behavio r and their alleged miracle mongering , the interest
of the crowd, who took them for representative s of true spirituality .
25. Abu 3l-Majd Majdu d Sana 3!, "Sana'Pabad, " in Mathnawiha,  ed. Mudarri s
Razawi (Tehran , 1348 sh./igGg) , line 42.
26. Henri Corbin , Avicenna  and the Visionary  Recital (New York and London ,
1960).
27. Paul Loosen, "Die weisen Narren des Naisaburi, " Zeitschrift  fiir Assyriologie  27
(1912), deal s with this type of mentall y derange d "wise" man or "saint."

--- Page 43 ---
2O / WHAT I S SUFISM ?
In the introductio n to his Nafahdt al-uns, Jam! poignantl y criticize s
the imitator s of the differen t Sufi types and their vain and dangerou s
attitudes. Th e innumerabl e verses of Persian poets who juxtapos e
molla and lover, pulpit and gallows , and claim that true love is the
greatest enem y of reason and that the lover should be comparabl e
to Majnun,  the demente d lover who was the laughin g stock of chil-
dren, ma y have enhance d the importanc e of this class of illiterate ,
crude, an d sometime s even very nasty "saints. "
Comparatively harmles s types, living on the charity of the pious,
did not really endange r the Sufi movement ; but the degeneratio n
of the wanderin g dervishe s or faqirs, the "poor," who performe d
miracles an d were beyond the law (bl s/mrc), has done much to bring
Sufism int o discredit . It was such people whom Europea n traveler s
in the East met first, so that one of the honorifi c names given to the
genuine mystic , faqlr, "poor," has become, in German , the designa -
tion of a mere trickster .
From the very beginning , the mystics strictly distinguishe d be-
tween the true Sufi, the mutasawwif  who aspires at reaching a high-
er spiritua l level, and the mustawif,  the man who pretend s to be a
mystic bu t is a useless, even dangerous , intruder . They knew well
that the spiritua l path is "hard to travel except for those who were
created fo r that purpose " (H 4), and that it is impossibl e to become a
true Sufi if one is not born that way: "This patched frock must have
been sew n in pre-eternity, " for, as much as a person may strive to
reach the rank of a Sufi, "no ass can turn into a horse by energy and
zeal" (U 70-71) . Therefore , the complain t about the decline of
Sufism almos t coincide s with its beginning ; a saying of the ninth-
century mystic , the Persian Yahya ibn Mu cadh, warn s his fellow
mystics: "Avoi d the society of three classes of men—heedles s savants,
hypocritical Koran-readers , and ignoran t pretender s to Sufism" (H
17; cf. B 411). Poets have satirized the self-style d Sufi (S 666), and in
the elevent h century it was repeatedl y said: "Today Sufism is a
name withou t reality, but formerl y it was a reality withou t name.
.. . The pretenc e is known and the practice unknown " (H 44). Peo-
ple were content with empty confession , and "blind conformit y has
taken the place of spiritua l enthusiasm " (H 7). The mystica l con-
certs in which the Sufis might become enrapture d and begin to spin
around thei r axis were taken, by many, for the essence,o f Sufism.
And to pretend mystica l knowledg e and experienc e was—an d still
is—quite easy . The stock of delightfu l stories and the legends of

--- Page 44 ---
WHAT I S SUFISM ? / 21
ancient saint s could always attract people; well-recite d verses might
move the listener s to tears; and it was certainly easier to beg food at
the doors of the rich and give a blessing in exchang e than to pursue
a normal profession . Thus a saint of the eleventh century angrily de-
clared: "I looked into Hell, and I saw that most of its inhabitant s
were thos e donning a patched frock and carryin g a food-bowl " (B
309). Thes e accurse d people are, as Baqli explains the saying, the
traitors to mysticism , those who claim gnosis but have only the ex-
ternal colo r of truth, because they lack knowledg e of the Muham -
madan religiou s law. "Their prayer-directio n is the charmin g be-
loved [shdhid],  the candle [sham c at joyous meetings ] and the belly
[shikam]" (S D 82). As time passed the complaint s about the degen-
eration of Sufism became more eloquent . cUrfi, one of Akbar's court-
poets (d. 1591), says in a quatrain :
The Sufi is busy with deceivin g men and women ,
The ignoran t one is busy with buildin g up his body,
The wise man is busy with the coquetr y of words,
The lover is busy with annihilatin g himself. 28
He thus attribute s to the lover the quality that should be that of the
Sufi: namely , to annihilat e himself in the Beloved .
The word Sufi became a pejorativ e expression ; the great mystic
of Delhi in the eighteent h century , Mir Dard, insistentl y repeate d
that he did not want to be called a Sufi, but rather "a true Muham -
madan." H e did not hesitate to call the representative s of mystical
doctrines oppose d to his stern, law-boun d mysticis m "pig-natured, "
and he often expresse d his contemp t for the "shopkeepe r sheikh, "
the "selle r of patched frocks" who was found everywher e in the
country. H e would have agreed completel y with his Arabian con-
temporary al-Bad r al-Hijazi , whose satire on the decline of Sufism
Arberry ha s translated: 29
Would tha t we had not lived to see every demente d madman held up by
his fellows as a Pole!
Their ulema  take refuge in him, indeed, they have even adopted him
as a Lord, instead of the Lord of the Throne.
For they have forgotte n God, saying "So-and-s o provide s deliveranc e
from sufferin g for all mankind. "
28. Muhamma d cUrfI ShirazI , Kulliydt,  ed. Ali Jawahir i (Tehran , 1336 sh./ig57) ,
p. 448.
29. Arberry , Sufism, p. 128.

--- Page 45 ---
22 / WHA T IS SUFISM ?
When he dies, they make him the object of pilgrimage , and hasten to
his shrine , Arabs and foreigner s alike;
Some kiss his grave, and some the threshol d of his door, and the dust... .
Hijazi ha s put his finger on the danger of the exaggerate d venera -
tion of the spiritua l master, the sheikh or pir (see chapter 5), what
Muhammad Iqba l has called "pirism, " which means the absolut e
sway of the leader over his follower s and the attendan t exploitatio n
of ignoran t peasant s and villagers .
In their criticism of saint worship and pirism— a facet of popular
Islam the danger of which one can scarcel y realize withou t hav-
ing lived in the East—Musli m modernist s and moderat e Sufis are
united. Bu t to reach this point, we have first to travel the long road
through th e outward history of Sufism. We shall see how this move-
ment has assume d various shapes appropriat e to the times and the
personalities o f its leaders, though its substanc e has remaine d the
same.

--- Page 46 ---
2. HISTORICA L
OUTLINES o f
CLASSICAL SUFIS M
THE FORMATIVE PERIOD
"Islamic mysticis m is the attemp t to reach individua l
salvation throug h attainin g the true tauhid,"  says one of the leading
Western orientalists. 1 In fact, the quintessenc e of the long history of
Sufism is to express anew, in differen t formulations , the overwhelm -
ing truth that "there is no deity but Allah" and to realize that He
alone can be the object of worship .
The histor y of Sufism is a chart showing some of the stations on
this path of interpretation , some of the forms in which this one
reality wa s expressed , some of the differen t ways in which the mystics
i. Hans Heinrich Schaeder , "Zur Deutung des islamische n Mystik, " Orientalistische
Literaturzeitung 3 0 (1935): 845.
23

--- Page 47 ---
24 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
tried to reach their goal, whethe r individuall y or collectively ,
through gnosi s or through love, by means of asceticis m or through
practices leadin g to ecstatic rapture . Its external history is a history
of the spiritual , theological , and literary movement s inside Islam.
At the same time, because of its deep roots in the ritual practice s
taught by the Koran, Sufism reflects the differen t attitude s of Mus-
lims towar d "the world"; thus we find among the mystics antiworld -
ly ascetic s and active fighters for the glory of their faith, austere
preachers o f repentanc e and enthusiasti c hymnodist s praising God's
eternal loving-kindness , builders of highly sophisticate d theosophi -
cal system s and enrapture d lovers of Eternal Beauty.
The aims of all the mystics are essentiall y the same. For, as Henri
Corbin ha s stated, "the religiou s conscienc e of Islam is centere d
upon a fact of meta-history " (W 46), namely, upon the transhistori -
cal fact of the primordia l covenan t as understoo d from the Korani c
word in Sura 7:171. Before creation , God called the future humani -
ty out of the loins of the not-yet-create d Adam and addresse d them
with the words: "Am I not your Lord?" (alastu bi-rabbikum],  and
they answered : "Yes, we witness it" (bald shahidna).  The idea of this
primordial covenan t (mlthaq)  between God and humanit y has im-
pressed th e religiou s conscienc e of the Muslims , and especiall y the
Muslim mystics , more than any other idea. Here is the starting
point for their understandin g of free will and predestination , of
election an d acceptance , of God's eternal power and man's loving
response an d promise . The goal of the mystic is to return to the ex-
perience o f the "Day of Alastu,"  when only God existed , before He
led future creature s out of the abyss of not-bein g and endowe d them
with life, love, and understandin g so that they might face Him
again at the end of time.
Sufism trace s its origins back to the Prophe t of Islam and takes
inspiration fro m the divine word as revealed through him in the
Koran.2 Go d has manifeste d His will, or rather Himself , in the
words of the holy book, which is, basically , the only means by which
man can know Him. The Koran was accepted relativel y early by the
faithful a s uncreate d and coeterna l with God. It has been for every
Muslim, an d particularl y for the mystics, the "uniqu e lexicon, " the
2. On Korani c exegesis see Ignaz Goldziher , Die Richtungen  der islamischen  Ko-
ranauslegung (Leiden , 1920); Paul Nwyia, Exegese  coranique  et langage  mystique
(Beirut, 1970) , an excellen t analysi s of early Sufi language , adds to Louis Massignon' s
classical study , Essai sur les origines du lexique technique  de la mystique  musulmane,
gd ed. (Paris, 1968).

--- Page 48 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 25
"essential textboo k of his sciences , the key for his Weltanschau-
ung," as Louis Massigno n has put it (P 465). For everythin g con-
cerning worldl y and spiritua l affairs can be found in this book,
and its interpretatio n in differen t ages shows how the self-under -
standing o f the Muslim communit y grew and changed . The mystics
have playe d a decisive role in the developmen t of the Koranic sci-
ences; thei r hermeneutica l method s range from a simple verbal
interpretation t o symbolica l and allegorica l exegesis , without, how-
ever, denyin g the value of the exterior meanin g of the Korani c
words. Fo r the devout—som e of whom could find up to seven thou-
sand meaning s in a single Koranic verse—th e holy book was "the
resurrection," for , as Hallaj had claimed , "in it there are the signs
of Divine Lordshi p [rububiyya],  informatio n of the resurrection ,
and news about the future till the eternity of eternities . Whosoever
knows the Koran is, so to speak, in the Resurrection " (B 265). The
words of the Koran have formed the cornerston e for all mystical
doctrines: th e early Sufis lived under the threat of the Last Judg-
ment as describe d in the terrifyin g words of many suras, until they
discovered th e promise of mutual love between God and man (Sura
5:59); the y found in it the differen t stages of the human soul, which
rises from the "soul that command s evil" (an-nafs al-ammdra)  to
the "soul which is at peace with God" (an-nafs  al-mutmc?inna).
They read that God is closer to man than his jugular vein (Sura
50:16) and is, at the same time, the Lord and Creator of the universe ,
immanent an d transcendent . "The sights do not reach Him" (Sura
6:103), bu t "whithersoeve r ye turn there is the Face of God" (Sura
2:109). Go d has "put signs into nature and into the human soul"
(Sura 51:21) , and it is necessar y to see and to understan d them.
God, as revealed in the Koran, is both the stern Judge and the
Merciful an d Compassionate ; He is All-knowin g and Wise, but He
is also the Most Cunning . The numerou s and often contradictor y
attributes give n to Allah in the Koran form the chain of the ninety-
nine most beautifu l names—name s that were to play an importan t
role in later mystica l theories and in the life of prayer and were
sometimes use d in almost magical connections . The hope of dis-
covering th e Greates t Name of God has inspired many a Sufi who
dreamed o f reaching the highest bliss in this world and the next
by means of this blessed name. God appears , through the Koranic
words, as the only real Agent who creates and predestine s human
actions. H e is the Absolut e Personality—a s the Sufis defined it: "He

--- Page 49 ---
26 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
alone has the right to say T " (W 249)—an d the Reality , al-haqq,  a
word tha t was used by most of the later mystics to designat e God.
Just as the scholasti c theologian s defined God by forty-on e attri-
butes—twenty attribute s of necessity , twenty of impossibility , and
one of possibility—man y of the later Sufis invente d complicate d
systems to draw closer to the mystery of the divine, the Absolut e
Being, th e Pure Existence , or whateve r names they might find.
Pious mystic s have often objecte d to these pseudophilosophica l defi-
nitions containin g names and words not found in the Koran and
therefore il l becomin g Him who revealed Himsel f in the holy book.
But the Koran contain s more than the descriptio n of God and of
the otherworld ; it also regulate s the practica l and moral life of the
community, an d the Sufis meticulousl y followe d its injuctions . Fur-
ther, the recitatio n of the Koran was an importan t means of leading
the spirit into a meditativ e state, or even of producin g a mystical
rapture. Recite d in beautifu l tones, the rhythmi c and musica l word-
ing of the holy book carried the minds of the devout into higher
spheres an d might open a higher level of understandin g to them.
The languag e of the Koran was common to Muslim s all over the
world; it has helped to shape the expression s not only of theologians
or lawyer divines but of poets and men of letters; it permeate d the
Islamic communit y as a living force. Even though million s of men
and wome n did not and do not understan d its Arabic wording , they
still sense the numinou s quality of the book and live with it. One
can certainl y speak of a "koranization " of the memory 3; and every-
one who has read Persian , Turkish , or any other Islamic idiom
knows ho w strongl y the languag e of the Koran has penetrate d the
literature an d everyda y language , and how beautifull y the "letters
of the Koran" have been elaborate d accordin g to the artistic taste
of Persians , Turks, Indians , and Africans , creating the most ex-
quisite calligraphy—th e typical art of the mystics .
Sufism trace s its origin back to the Prophe t himself . He is de-
scribed in the Koran as ummi, "illiterate " (Sura 7:157-58) , a quality
that is central to the understandin g of Islamic religiosity : just as in
Christianity, wher e God reveals Himself through Christ—th e word
made flesh—th e virginity of Mary is required in order to produce an
immaculate vesse l for the divine word, so in Islam, where God re-
veals Himsel f through the word of the Koran, the Prophet had to be
3. Paul Nwyia, Ibn ^Ata? Allah et la naissance  de la confrerie  sadilite (Beirut, 1972),
p. 46.

--- Page 50 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 27
a vessel that was unpollute d by "intellectual " knowledg e of word
and script so that he could carry the trust in perfect purity.
Muhammad i s the first link in the spiritual chain of Sufism, and
his ascensio n through the heavens into the divine presence , to which
the first lines of Sura 17 allude, became the prototyp e of the mystic's
spiritual ascensio n into the intimate presence of God. Accordin g to
the tradition , esoteric wisdom was transmitte d from Muhamma d to
his cousin and son-in-la w CAH ibn Abi Talib, the fourth of the
righteous caliph s (d. 661). Other member s of his family and his
friends, accordin g to legend, were endowed with mystica l insight or
pursued mystica l practices . The tradition s (hadlth)  that go back to
the Prophet , or at least are attribute d to him, served the Sufis when
they elaborate d their own definition s of the various stages and states.
Every tendenc y within Islam, and so within Sufism, found materia l
to support its claims from Propheti c traditions . In later times a con-
siderable numbe r of hadlth that are not found in the official collec-
tions as they were compile d in the second half of the ninth century
were used by the Sufis. In a comparativel y short time, Muhammad' s
personality gaine d great importanc e for the spiritua l life of his com-
munity: H e was the ideal leader, and the duty of every Muslim was
to imitate him. His veneratio n soon reached mythica l heights, until
he was conceive d by the medieva l mystics as the Perfect Man par
excellence, th e cause and goal of creation , the friend of God and
the intercesso r on behalf of his communit y (see chapter 4).
The Wester n student of Islam, used to the traditiona l picture of
Muhammad a s it emerged during hundred s of years of hatred and
enmity in the Christia n world, will be surprise d to see the strong
"mystical" qualitie s attribute d to this man who was, accordin g to
the usual Western understanding , a mere politician , shrewd and
sensual, or , at the best, the founder of a heresy derived from Chris-
tianity. Eve n most recent studies of the Prophet , which have shown
his sincerit y and his deep religiou s concern , do not convey that
quality of mystical love that his follower s feel for him.
We do not know how many of the later tales of Muhammad' s
ascetic piet y are true and how many simply reflect the ideals of later
mystical devotion . A number of his sayings about the importanc e
of prayer, and mainly of the night vigils, seem to be authentic , and
"when his eyes slept his heart did not sleep," as his beloved young
wife A cisha relates . The classica l manuals of Sufism contain large
collections o f sayings in which the Prophet exhorts the faithful to

--- Page 51 ---
28 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
constant praye r and to the recollectio n of God during every mo-
ment of life (L 64; G 1:265-66) . Indeed, a prophet who was so cer-
tain of being God's instrumen t must have relied upon prayer; for
through praye r he could experience , over and over again, the pres-
ence of Him who had sent him.
Mystical traditio n include s some of Muhammad' s companion s
among th e spiritua l ancestor s of Sufism—w e have already men-
tioned the so-calle d ahl as-suffa, "the People of the Bench," poor
and pious member s of the communit y who lived in the mosque of
Medina. Amon g the Prophet' s companions , Abu Dharr al-Ghifar i
(d. 653) is often mentione d as "un socialist e avant la lettre," as Louis
Massignon put s it; it is to him that the traditio n ascribes many sen-
tences abou t poverty, and he appears as the prototyp e of the true
faqir, the poor person who possesse s nothing but is totally possesse d
by God, partakin g of His everlastin g riches.
Even mor e importan t is Salman al-Farisi , a Persian-bor n barber
who was taken into Muhammad' s househol d and became the model
of spiritua l adoption and mystica l initiation—h e is, thus, the symbol
of the Persians , who were adopted into Islam, and links the Arabian
world wit h the Iranian tradition . His spiritualit y was later consid-
ered a decisive element in the history of Persian Sufism and in Shia
thought.4 Salma n the Barber was later regarded as the patron saint
of small artisans, just as some of the ninth- and tenth-centur y Sufis
were to become patrons of the artisan groups whose profession s they
shared; Salma n came to stand for the impact of Sufism on the large
masses (se e MM 5).
Another nam e mysticall y connecte d with the Prophet is that of
Uways al-Qaranl , who is suppose d to have lived in Yemen and who
never met the Prophet. 5 It is said that Muhamma d knew of his piety
and uttere d these famous words: "The breath of the Mercifu l (nafas
ar-Rahmdn) come s to me from Yemen. " Uways, about whom the
tradition relate s that he spent all his nights in prayer (T 1:21), be-
came, for the later Sufis, the prototyp e of the inspired Sufi who has
been guide d solely by divine grace, knowing of the Prophet without
outward connection . Thus uwaysl, or, as the Turks say, veysi me-
shreb, is the mystic who has attained illuminatio n outside the regu-
lar mystica l path and withou t the mediatio n and guidanc e of a
4. Louis Massignon , "Salma n Pak et les premice s spirituelle s de 1'Islam iranien, "
Societe de s etudes iraniennes  7 (1934).
5. A. S. Husaini , "Uways al-Qaran i and the Uwaysi Sufis," Moslem  World 57, no. 2
(April 1967) .

--- Page 52 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 2Q
living sheikh . And the "breath of the Merciful " has become, in po-
etical language , the symbol for the act of divine guidance , which,
like the morning breeze, opens the contracte d bud of the human
heart.
Out of this nucleus of pious people around Muhamma d has
emerged a  definition that was adopted by the Sufis: that is, the three-
fold attitud e of isldm, Iman, and ihsdn. 6 The Koran speaks of isldm
and iman;  isldm is the complet e and exclusiv e surrende r of the
faithful to God's will and his perfect acceptanc e of the injunction s
as preache d in the Koran, whereas Iman, "faith," constitute s the in-
terior aspec t of Islam. Thus a muslim need not be a mifmin "one
who has faith," but the mifmin is definitel y a muslim. As to ihsdn,
it was added—accordin g to most tradition s by the Prophet himself—
with the meanin g "that you worship God as if you see Him," for
even thoug h man does not see God, God always sees man, and the
Koran assert s that "mercy is with those who practic e ihsdn [al-
muhsinun, 'thos e who do well']" (Sura 7:54). With the addition of
this third element the complet e interiorizatio n of Islam begins; tor
the believe r has to feel that he stands every moment in the presenc e
of God, that he has to behave with awe and respect, and must never
fall back into the "sleep of heedlessness, " never forget the all-
embracing divin e presence .
We know little about the earliest appearanc e of ascetic tendencie s
in Islam. But when, in 661, CAH, the fourth caliph, was assassinate d
and the dynasty o f the Omayyad s came to power, the differen t trends
within th e communit y became more conspicuous . The continuou s
expansion o f the Muslim Empire made the pious ponder the dis-
crepancy betwee n the eschatologica l threat in the early Korani c
revelations an d the necessit y to expand the realms of Muslim rule
by conquerin g more and more of the lands of the infidels. These
conquests wer e led by a dynasty whose member s were anythin g but
representative o f Muslim ideals: the Omayyad s were always ac-
cused of utter worldlines s and impious behavior (with the exceptio n
of cUmar II, 717-20) . The resistanc e of the pious circles to the
government gre w stronge r and was expresse d in theologica l debates
about the right ruler of the faithful and the condition s for the lead-
ership of the community . The negativ e attitude toward the govern-
ment engendere d during these decades has significantl y shaped the
6. Arend Jan Wensinck , Concordance  et indices de la tradition  musulmane  (Leiden,
1936-71), i : 4675.

--- Page 53 ---
3O / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
feeling of the pious throughou t the history of Islam; the Sufis would
often equat e "government " with "evil." Medina , the city of the
Prophet, wa s one center of pious conservatives ; other groups lived
in the new Muslim settlement s in Iraq, a province where the love
for Muhammad' s family was particularl y strong and which was
antagonistic t o Syria, the country where the Omayya d rulers had
set up their capital.
The nam e that stands for the early ascetic, antigovernmenta l at-
titude is that of the patriarc h of Muslim mysticism , Hasan al-Basr i
(d. 728). 7 He saw the gloriou s conquest s of the Arabs in 711, the
memorable yea r when they crossed the straits of Gibralta r (which
still bears the name of the Muslim conquero r Tariq, jabal Tariq,
"Tariq's mountain") , and when they also reached Sind, the lower
Indus valley , and laid the foundatio n of a Muslim rule that still
continues i n present Pakistan ; in the same year, 711, the Muslim s
reached th e borders of Transoxania , which was destined to become
an importan t center of Muslim learnin g and piety. Hasan al-Basri ,
however, sobe r and clearsighte d as he was, sensed the dangers in-
herent in a society that had become intereste d in conques t alone, in
collecting wealt h and worldly goods, while tending to forget the
Koranic wor d (Sura 55:26): "Whateve r is on earth is perishin g save
His Face. " He used to admonis h his listeners to live strictly accord-
ing to the rules laid down by the Koran so that they would not be
ashamed a t Doomsday : "O son of Adam, you will die alone and en-
ter the tomb alone an d be resurrecte d alone, and it is with you alone
that the reckonin g will be made!" Why care so much for this perish-
able world ? "Be with this world as if you had never been there, and
with the Otherworl d as if you would never leave it." Many cen-
turies late r his words still echo in Persian , Turkish , and Pashto
mystical verses .
Hasan al-Basr i was deeply steeped in the sadness and fear so
typical of ascetics of all religions . "It was as if Hellfire had been
created exclusivel y for him and for cUmar II," says one historian .
His preachin g and his exhortations , produce d in beautifu l sonorou s
Arabic, influence d many a pious soul in Iraq and elsewhere . His
scrupulosity an d his fear of the Day of Judgmen t are reflecte d in
many saying s of his contemporarie s or of later Muslims , who might
7. Hans Heinrich Schaeder , in "Hasan al-Basri, " Der Islam 13 (1923), dealt for the
first time with Hasan but never complete d his study. Hellmut Ritter, "Hasan al-Basri ,
Studien zu r Geschicht e der islamische n Frommigkeit, " Der Islam 31 (1933), gave an
excellent analysis . Quotation s are taken from Ritter' s article.

--- Page 54 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 31
exclaim, whe n thinkin g of God's terrible wrath and of their own
sinful lives : "O that I were dust and ashes!"— a saying that was pro-
jected bac k even into the mouth of Muhammad' s most trustworth y
companions (cf . Sura 78:41).
Louis Massigno n has seen in Hasan and in the ascetics who fol-
lowed him a "realistic critical tendency " as opposed to the more
"idealistic tradition " that prevaile d in Kufa, the seat of the first
Shia group s and the home town of Abu Hashim , the first to be called
as-Sufl. It is true that the first ascetic tendencie s in Basra and its en-
vironment wer e almost exclusivel y devotiona l and lacked any in-
terest in speculativ e thought . In contras t with the growing luxury
of life, the men and women of these groups advocate d strict renun-
ciation of the world and what was in it and relied upon the Proph-
et's word: "If ye knew what I know ye would laugh little and weep
much." Therefor e they were known as "those who constantl y weep"
(al-bakklfun}, fo r both the miserabl e state of the world and the
meditation o f their own shortcoming s made them cry in hope of
divine hel p and forgiveness . Ibn ar-Rumi , the Iraqi poet of the
ninth century , has dramaticall y describe d them in one of his poems,
and KharaqanI , in the eleventh century , attests that "God is fond of
His servant' s crying" (N 299). It is, therefore , not surprisin g that
one of  Hasan  al-Basrl's  disciples  founded  a settlement  of ascetically
inclined peopl e in Abbada n on the Persian Gulf: that disciple was
cAbduDl Wahi d ibn Zayd (d. 794), described as a typical representa -
tive of the virtue of warcf, "abstinence, " and of permanen t sadness.
Through him , Hasan's ideals reached Syria, where Abu Sulayma n
ad-Darani (d . 830) and his disciple Ahmad ibn Abfl-Hawar i (d.
851) are the best-know n member s of the Basrian ascetic movement .
A new chapter in the history of Islam was opened when the Ab-
basids—related t o Muhammad' s uncle cAbbas—came t o power in
750. Accordin g to the traditiona l interpretation , the long rule of
this dynast y (their last member was killed by the Mongol s in 1258)
marks the high tide of Muslim culture and civilization . Arts and
sciences, la w and philology , theology and philosoph y were develop -
ing; every branch of human knowledg e was cultivated . The legal
injunctions o f the Koran were brought into a more systemati c form
by the scholars who are considere d the founder s of the four orthodox
law schools : Abu Hanifa (d. 767), Malik ibn Anas (d. 795), ash-
Shaficl (d. 820), and Ahmad ibn Hanbal (d. 855). They took into
account lega l points ranging from obscur e matters pertainin g to

--- Page 55 ---
32 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
laws of inheritanc e to the smalles t details for the correct perfor-
mance of the ritual prayer or the pilgrimage . The four schools dif-
fered from each other only on minor points; they were all founded
upon the Koran and the sunna, i.e., the Propheti c tradition , and
made the ijmd*, the consensu s of the "doctor s of law" on a certain
point, an instrumen t for introducin g innovativ e legal decisions .
They differe d on the degree of personal judgmen t that was granted
to the jurist in making his decisions . As early as the late tenth cen-
tury, the possibilit y of free investigatio n into the sources of law
(ijtihdd] i n matters that previousl y had been decided was no longer
permitted; thi s led to a fossilizatio n of jurisprudence , and the ijmcf,
once a force for creative change in Islam, became the cause of its
stagnation. Althoug h Islamic law was never codified , the classi-
cal handbooks , along with their commentarie s and scholia , were
handed dow n verbatim through the generations—an d the Sufis have
often raise d their voices against the spiritles s legalism that stifled
free developmen t of the persona l spiritual life.
Theological issue s were widely discussed , mainly in connectio n
with the problem of the legitimac y of the leader of the community ,
which embrace s the question of predestinatio n as well as the prob-
lem of whether or not a grave sinner can remain within the pale of
Islam. Th e first attempts at defining the central theme of Islam, the
unity of God, were made at approximatel y the same time, with
theologians graduall y learning the skills of dialectica l disputatio n
and logic. They fought relentlessl y against any trace of Manichaea n
dualism, o f Christia n trinitarianism , or of whateve r seemed to con-
stitute shirk,  "associatin g anythin g with God," i.e., worship of any-
thing beside s the sovereig n ruler Allah. Defense of God's absolute
unity led to discussion s concernin g the attribute s of God, from
which ensue d the problem of whether the Koran, as God's own
word, wa s created (accordin g to the Muctazila) or uncreate d (ac-
cording to the follower s of Ahmad ibn Hanbal and the majority of
the faithful) . But here, too, the zeal for accuracy of definitio n led
the scholar s into hairsplittin g discussions—a s had been the case with
the legalists—an d Macruf al-Karkhi , a leading Sufi of the early
ninth centur y in Baghdad , sighed: "When God loves His servant,
He opens for him the door of actions [i.e., religious and pious acts]
and closes the door of theologica l disputations." 8 The theologica l
8. cAbdur Rahma n as-Sulami , Kitdb tabaqat  as-Sufiyya,  ed. Nuraddi n Sharib a
(Cairo, 1953) , p. 87.

--- Page 56 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 33
discussions ha d repercussion s upon religiou s thought in general, as,
indeed, wa s the case with the new interest in Greek science and phi-
losophy. Th e reign of the caliph Ma3mun (813-33 ) marks the begin-
ning of that remarkabl e activity of Arab translator s (many of whom
were non-Muslims ) who made Greek science and philosoph y avail-
able to Muslim scholars ; these, in turn, elaborate d the given data,
adding man y new practica l insights. The noteworth y results of their
scholarship deepl y influence d Western though t and science in the
later Middl e Ages.
All these currents helped develop the language ; the jurists, the
theologians, an d the translator s gave Arabic a greater pliability ,
adding ne w dimension s to an already rich and beautifu l language .
The mystics , too, made considerabl e contribution s in this regard-
Paul Nwyia , noting the "adventure s of the mystics" in language , has
highlighted th e fact that, "thanks to the mystics, in the Arabic lan-
guage, an authenti c language , that of experience , was born" (W 4).
The writing s of the early Sufis show not only variety of expressio n
but an increasin g profundit y of thought as the mystical experienc e
is refined. In the prayers of some of the Sufis in the tenth century , or
in certain poems by Hallaj, the ineffabl e experienc e has been ab-
stracted in words of unforgettabl e beauty.
A similar developmen t is visible, in later times, in the non-Ara b
countries: th e literary languag e of Iran owes much to writers who
gave voic e to mystica l yearning s in Persian ; Turkish was trans-
formed by the mystica l poet Yunus Emre (d. circa 1321) into a de-
lightful literar y idiom. Likewis e the Indo-Musli m language s (Sin-
dhi, Panjabi , and to a great extent Urdu and Pashto) are in large
part the result of the speech and song of mystical leaders who could
not addres s their simple disciple s in high-flow n theologica l Arabic
or poetica l Persian; in order to express the mysterie s of divine love
and devotion , they were obliged to use the vernaculars , making
them vehicle s of the most lofty thought . Then they emerged as lan-
guages wel l able to serve as a literary medium for nonmystica l
writers.
The expansio n of the Islamic Empire during the late Omayya d
and early Abbasid periods had brought the Muslim s into contact
with large groups of non-Muslim s representin g differen t cultural
levels and varied traditions . The presenc e of Zoroastria n influence s
must certainl y be accepted from the beginnin g of the Abbasid pe-
riod, whe n the capital was shifted from Damascu s to Baghdad . Per-

--- Page 57 ---
34 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
sian nobleme n served at the court; Persian tradition s from the
"Book of Kings" were incorporate d into the Arabic narrativ e litera-
ture, helpin g to shape the image of the ideal ruler; and Persian
mythology wa s to become a substitut e for the weak pre-Islamic Ara -
bic tradition . In Eastern Iran and Transoxania , the Muslim s met
Buddhists whos e ascetic practice s were of some interest to them.
Their contact s with Hinduis m as a religion were negligibl e in this
period, althoug h India contribute d extensivel y to the developmen t
of Islami c mathematic s and astronomy . But India in general was
considered th e country of the sage, and the home of magical prac-
tices performe d by blackish , ugly people. Manichaeism , so wide-
spread in the Near and Middle East, and in Central Asia, attracted
the interes t of the theologians , and more than one mystic was ac-
cused of Manichaea n inclinations . Mandaean s and Jews constitute d
a small, but active, minority .
The most significan t contacts of the early Abbasid Muslim s were
with Christians , split into numerou s groups ranging from the Nes-
torians to the many Monophysit e sects and churches. 9 Christia n
ascetics an d hermits who inhabite d places in Iraq and the moun-
tains of Lebano n are mentione d frequentl y in Sufi stories—an d in
pre-Islamic poetr y there were already allusion s to the light shining
forth from the Christia n hermit' s cell. A meeting with a Christian
ascetic or with a wise monk is a fictional element in Sufi legends of
early times : such a person usually explain s some mystica l truths to
the seeker ; or the disciple admires his austerit y but is informe d by
a heavenl y voice that all his asceticis m will not gain him salvatio n
since he has no faith in Muhammad . Jesus, the last prophet before
Muhammad accordin g to Koranic revelation , appears to the Sufis as
the ideal ascetic and also as the pure lover of God. A homeless pil-
grim, wanderin g withou t knowin g where to put his head, he in-
structs th e devout about the importanc e of modesty , peace, and
charity, fo r "just as the seed does not grow but from dust, so the
9. There are several studies devoted to the mystics of the first three centuries : Henry
Frederick Amedroz , "Notes on Some Sufi Lives," Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society,
1912; Margare t Smith, Studies in Early Mysticism  in the Near and Middle  East (Lon-
don, 1931) , deals with the relationship s betwee n Christia n and Islamic mysticism . The
same proble m has been discusse d by Tor Andrae , "Zuhd und Monchtum, " Le monde
oriental 2 5 (1931), and in several other studies by this Swedish theologian . His post-
humously publishe d book / Myrtentrddgdrden  (Uppsala , 1947), translate d into English
by Birgitt a Sharpe as In the Garden  of Myrtles (Albany , N.Y., 1988), is an excellen t
introduction t o the pre-Hallajia n developmen t of Sufism.

--- Page 58 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 35
seed of wisdom does not grow but from a heart like dust." 10 It is the
Jesus of the Sermon on the Mount whose image is reflected in say-
ings of the first generation s of Sufis, and he continue d to be a fa-
vorite figur e in later Sufi poetry as well: he and his virgin mother
become exalte d symboli c figures—th e woman unspoile d by worldly
concern, th e pure receptacl e of the divine spirit, and the prophet
born out of the divine command , surname d "Spirit of God," be-
came model s of the pure spiritua l life.
It is even possible that the first Sufis adopted from the Christia n
ascetics th e woolen garmen t from which their name derives. These
Sufis were people who meticulousl y fulfilled the words of the law,
prayed an d fasted, constantl y recollectin g God, and were absolutel y
bound by Koran and tradition . Thus says one of them: "Sometime s
Truth knock s at my heart for forty days, but I do not permit it to
enter my heart unless it brings two witnesses , the Koran and the
Prophetic tradition " (L 104). The country of incomparabl e ascetic
achievement wa s Khurasa n in the northeaster n part of the Abbasid
Empire. A  saying ascribed to one of the ninth-centur y Khurasania n
ascetics serve s well as an introductio n to the mentalit y typical of
this remarkabl e group: "Who wants to attain to the highest honor
should prefe r seven to seven: poverty to wealth, hunger to satiety,
the low to the elevated , humiliatio n to honor, modesty to pride,
sadness to joy, death to life" (N 45). As late as the thirteent h century
Jalaluddm Rum i alludes in one of his verses to the ascetics of Herat
and Merw- i Taliqan, declarin g that even they would be intoxicate d
if the scent of the wine of love were to reach them from the Ma-
ghreb, the far west (D 1966). But this scent very rarely reached
them, thoug h perhaps more true mystica l love is hidden beneath
their outwar d austerit y than a modern reader can realize. 11
One of the most famous conversio n stories in early Sufism is that
of Fudayl ibn clyad. He was a highwayman , albeit a magnanimou s
one, betwee n the cities of Abiward and Sarakhs . One day, on the
way to his beloved, he happene d to hear a verse from the Koran and
immediately gav e up banditry , thereafte r devoting himself to the
study of the Propheti c tradition in Kufa. He died in Mecca in 803.
10. Abu Talib al-Makkl . Qut al-qulub  fi mucdmalat al-mahbub,  z vols. (Cairo,
1310 h./iSgs-gg) , 2:74.
11. Early ascetic Sufism has beeen treated by Paul Klappstein , Vier turkestanische
Heilige, ei n Beitrag  zum Verstandnis  der islamischen  Mystik (Berlin , 1919), and Jakob
Hallauer, Di e Vita des Ibrahim  ibn Edhem  in der Tedhkiret  al-Ewlija  des Ferid ed-
Din Attar  (Leipzig , 1925)—bot h rather superficial .

--- Page 59 ---
36 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
Fudayl is a typical representativ e of early orthodo x asceticism ,
"and whe n he died, sadness was taken away from the world" (Q 9).
This sadnes s is reflected in many of his sayings. He disliked the com-
pany of people, and in words reminiscen t of his contemporar y Ra-
bica, the woman saint, he said: "When night comes I am happy that
I am alone, without separation , with God, and when morning comes
I get distresse d because I detest the view of those people who enter
and distur b my solitude " (T 1:31). Althoug h Fudayl was married ,
he considere d family life one of the greatest obstacle s on the way to
God; he was seen smiling only once in thirty years—whe n his son
died. Thi s event was, for him, a sign of divine grace: "When God
loves His servant , He afflicts him, and when He loves him very
much He takes hold of him and leaves for him neither family nor
wealth" ( G 4:282). (The feeling of happines s at the death of family
members wa s not unknow n among medieva l Christia n mystics
either, as the story of Angela di Foligno shows). 12 Even Jalaludd m
Rumi wrote , quite withou t feeling, in a verse of his Mathnawi:
"The deat h of his children was for him like sweetmeat " (M 3:1927) ;
and the indifferenc e of some Indo-Musli m Chisht i saints of the
thirteenth an d fourteent h centurie s to the death of family member s
is well known. On the other hand, many of the great Sufis and
founders o f mystical fraternitie s were married and had large fami-
lies—Ahmad-i Ja m had forty-tw o children (N 357), and cAbduDl-
Qadir Gilan i had forty-nin e sons. Yet so rare is it to find any ap-
proval of happy family life in Sufi sayings that one is quite unpre-
pared for the exceptio n one meets in Mir Dard, the saint of Delhi
in the eighteent h century , who exclaime d in one of his books: "I
love my wife and my children dearly." 13
Among th e early ascetics, a preferenc e for celibacy was common
in spite of the Prophet' s example of married life and his advice to
raise a family. But, as Darani says, "the sweetnes s of adoratio n and
undisturbed surrende r of the heart which the single man can feel
the marrie d man can never experience " (G 2:22). The restlessnes s
caused by marriage , the distraction  from God, has often been de-
scribed by the Sufis (N 217), and the sorrows of family life might be
regarded a s "punishmen t for the executio n of legally permitte d
lusts" (N 185). Fudayl's elder contemporary , Ibrahim ibn Adham
12. Evely n Underbill , Mysticism:  A Study in the Nature  and Development  of Man's
Spiritual Consciousness  (1911; paperbac k ed., New York, 1956), p. 216.
13. Khwaj a Mir Dard, "Nala-y i Dard," no. 70, in Chahdr  risdla (Bhopal , 1310 h./
1892-93).

--- Page 60 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 37
(d. circa 790), whom he met at Mecca, expresse d such a notion in a
striking sentenc e often quoted in Sufi poetry and prose: "When a
man marrie s he embarks on a ship, and when a child is born he suf-
fers shipwreck " (L 199). Ibrahim ibn Adham—"th e key of mystical
sciences," a s Junayd called him (H 103)—ha s become, in Islamic tra-
dition, on e of the proverbia l example s of true poverty , abstinence ,
and trust in God. Accordin g to the legend, he renounce d the
princely lif e in Balkh, the old Buddhis t capital where he was born (a
story embellishe d with echoes of the Buddha legend). He later be-
came the subject of many pious tales in Eastern Islamic lands. A ro-
mance wa s even compose d about his adventure s and was known
particularly i n the Malayan archipelago .
Although hi s residenc e was Balkh,
Balkh becam e corrected , namely talkh ["bitter"] ,
says cAttar (U 264), with a pun: by changin g the diacritica l dots of
the first letter of Balkh, he implies that the former seat of power and
wealth becam e bitter for the young, highborn ascetic.
Ibrahim i s credited with making the first classificatio n of the
stages of zuhd, "asceticism. " Because of its tripartition , which was
common afte r the ninth century , it looks like a word from some la-
ter source , for it discerns: (a) renunciatio n of the world, (b) renun-
ciation of the happy feeling of having achieve d renunciation , and
(c) the stage in which the ascetic regards the world as so unimpor -
tant that he no longer looks at it.
The storie s of the degree of asceticis m achieve d by these early
Sufis soun d somewha t incredibl e to a modern mind; yet they
counted i t happines s to live completel y free of worldly things, even
though the y might use only a brick for a pillow (N 49) and a worn-
out mat of straw for a bed (if they did not prefer to sleep in a seated
position o r refrain from sleep at all). They cared neither for their
outward appearanc e nor for their attire, and althoug h they strictly
observed th e ritual purity require d for prayer, Ibn Adham was
proud of the huge number of lice living in his coat, and as late as
900, a maidservan t of a Sufi from Baghda d exclaimed : "O God, how
dirty are Thy friends—no t a single one among them is clean!" (N
621).
One of Fudayl's disciple s was Bishr, called al-Hdfi, "the bare-
footed one, " who considere d even shoes to be a "veil" on the path to
God. Bishr , like his master, came fro m Merw and, also like Fudayl,

--- Page 61 ---
38 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
was converte d by a miracle: on the road he found a piece of paper,
which he took with him becaus e the nam e of God was written on it
—this piou s act of the otherwis e worldly man was soon recompense d
when, by divine grace, he was transforme d into a Sufi. He settled in
Baghdad, wher e he died, after a perfectly scrupulou s life, in 841.
Bishr is said to have dwelt upon the concept of ikhlds, "absolute sin-
cerity," in every thought and action, an attitude that was elaborate d
to perfectio n by his younge r contemporar y in Baghdad , al-Harit h
al-Muhasibi.
Among th e early Khurasania n Sufis, the former merchan t Shaqiq
al-Balkhi (d.  809) is worthy of mention . Recent research has shown
that he was not only an expert on tawakkul,  "absolute trust in God"
—a path taken up by his disciple s Hatim al-Asam m (d. 851) and
Hatim's pupi l Abu Turab an-Nakhshab i (d. 859)—bu t that he was
also the first to discuss the "mystica l states" and was deeply con-
cerned wit h what he calls "the light of pure love of God" (W 228).
With thi s idea he comes close to the saint of Basra, Rabi ca al-
cAdawiyya, wh o died only a few years before him (801). 14
Rabica wa s "that one set apart in the seclusio n of holiness , that
woman veile d with the veil of sincerity , that one enflame d by love
and longin g .. ., lost in union with God, that one accepte d by men
as a second spotless Mary .. . " (T 159). Rabi ca is generall y regarde d
as the person who introduce d the elemen t of selfless love into the
austere teaching s of the early ascetics and gave Sufism the hue of true
mysticism. Jam ! has beautifull y explaine d the differenc e betwee n
these ascetic s and the genuine Sufis: "The ascetics regard the Beauty
of the Otherworl d with the light of faith and certitud e and despise
the world , but are still veiled by a sensual pleasure , namely the
thought o f Paradise , whereas the true Sufi is veiled from both worlds
by the vision of the Primordia l Beauty and Essentia l Love" (N 10).
Rabica wa s a slave girl, set free by her master. The most famous
story illustrativ e of the singlemindednes s of her devotio n is this:
Once, in the streets of Basra, she was asked why she was carrying a
torch in one hand and a ewer in the other, and she answered : "I want
to throw fire into Paradis e and pour water into Hell so that these
14. Margare t Smith, Rabija the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints  in Islam (Cambridge ,
1928), is a fundamenta l study that also deals with the role of women in Sufism in
general. c Abdur Rahma n Badawi , Shahidat  al-'-ishq  al-ildhl,  Rabija al-cAdawiyya
(Cairo, 1946) .

--- Page 62 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 39
two veils disappear , and it becomes clear who worship s God out of
love, not out of fear of Hell or hope for Paradise." 15
This love for love's sake has become the central topic of Sufism;
almost ever y mystica l poet in Islam has expresse d the idea that "the
lover mus t be in the way of love so that he does not remembe r Hell
or Paradise " (N 597). For "a few houris and castles" that are prom-
ised to the pious in Paradise are mere veils hiding the eternal divine
beauty—"when H e fills your mind with Paradise and houris know
by certain that He keeps you far from Himself " (MT 204). It would
certainly b e better if God took away Paradise or cast the ascetic who
feared hellfir e into that very fire, for both Paradis e and Hell are
created, an d thus distinct from God (T 1:73).
Rabica's lov e of God was absolute ; there was no rpom left for any
other though t or love. She did not marry, nor did she give the
Prophet a  special place in her piety. The world meant nothing to
her. She would shut the window s in spring without looking at the
flowers an d become lost in the contemplatio n of Him who created
flowers an d springtime . This story has often been retold by the mys-
tical poets of Iran. Every true mystic should know that "the gardens
and the fruits are inside, in the heart," as RumI says in his version of
Rabica's stor y (M 4: 1357; see also U 198). Rabi ca seems to have
been the first Sufi to speak about the jealous God—a concept not
unknown t o propheti c piety; but whereas the jealous God of the
orthodox doe s not allow anybod y to worship  anything besides Him,
RabiVs Go d "will suffer none to share with Him that love which is
due to Him alone." 16 And so she addresse s Him in small poetical
effusions:
O Beloved of hearts, I have none like unto Thee,
therefore hav e pity this day on the sinner
who come s to Thee.
O my Hope and my Rest and my Delight,
the heart can love none other but Thee. 17
In such perfect love, the mystic has "ceased to exist and passed out
of self. I am one with Him and altogethe r His." 18 Rabi ca had medi-
tated upo n the Koranic statemen t that God's love precede s man's
15. Smith , Rdbi'-a, p. 98.
16. Ibid., p. 108.
17. Ibid., p. 55.
18. Ibid., p. 110.

--- Page 63 ---
4O / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
love: "He loves them and they love Him" (Sura 5:59): "Love has
come from Eternit y and passes into Eternity and none has been
found in seventy thousan d worlds who drinks one drop of it until
at last he is absorbed in God, and from that comes the saying: He
loves them and they love Him" (T i :67). It was this Koranic passag e
that provide d the Sufis of the followin g generation s with proof for
their theorie s of the mutual love between the Creator and the
creature.
There is nothing left to distract the lover from God—th e spiritual
eye sees nothing but Him when the eye of the body is closed. He is
enough fo r the loving soul: "O my Lord, whateve r share of this
world Tho u dost bestow on me, bestow it on Thine enemies , and
whatever shar e of the next world Thou doest give me, give it to Thy
friends—Thou ar t enough for me" (T 1:73). Rabi ca's praye r has
been repeated , with variations , by Sufis of all ages, probably i n the
most shockin g form by Shibli (d. 945), the mystic of Baghdad whose
paradoxes ar e famous in Sufi history: "O God, hand this world and
the Otherworl d over to me so that I may make a morsel from this
world and throw it into a dog's mouth, and make a morsel of the
Otherworld an d put it into a Jew's mouth, for both are veils before
the true goal" (T 2:165). For Rabi ca the only thing that mattere d
was the hope of God and the word of His praise, which was sweeter
than any other word. The nightly prayer, one of the pivots of early
ascetic life , becomes , with her, a sweet and loving conversatio n be-
tween love r and beloved :
O God, the night has passed and the day has dawned . How I long to
know if Thou hast accepted my prayers or if Thou hast rejected them.
Therefore consol e me for it is Thine to console this state of mine. Tho u
hast given me life and cared for me, and Thine is the glory. If Thou
want to drive me from Thy door, yet would I not forsake it, for the love
that I bear in my heart towards Thee. 19
It was a daring prayer, often repeate d by the early Sufis, that the
true lover would not leave the door of the beloved even if driven
away.
Rabica wa s not the only woman saint in the eighth century ; sev-
eral wome n chose the mystica l path, sighing for the heavenl y be-
loved who , though absent from their sight, is never absent from
their hearts . Because of her intense feelings Rabi ca was accepted as
the mode l of selfless love even by those who otherwis e despised
19. Ibid., p. 27.

--- Page 64 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 41
women—but sinc e in the unity of God the lovers no longer have a
separate existence , no distinctio n can be made between man and
woman (T 1:59).
During th e ninth century differen t trends in the mystica l teach-
ings and the approac h to God emerged , and religiou s experience s
were expresse d in various styles and forms. But the roots of these de-
velopments wen t back to an earlier period. That has been shown
very clearl y in Pere Nwyia's research. He has emphazise d that Ja cfar
as-Sacliq, th e sixth imam of the Shia (d. 765), was certainly one of
the greates t teachers of early Sufism. His commentar y on the Koran,
part of which is preserve d in Sularm' s tafsir, shows an exceptiona l
insight int o mystica l phenomen a (W 161). Jacfar discerne d the four
different aspect s of the Koran: expression , for the common people;
allusion, fo r the privilege d or elite; touches of grace (late?if), for the
saints; an d finally the "realities, " for the prophet s (W 167). This
pluralistic structur e of the holy book led Jacfar to sketch a hier-
archical structur e of the faithful accordin g to the degree of their
interior knowledge— a principl e develope d by later Sufis when they
identified th e "stages" and "stations " and then divided them into
those for the common people, for the elect, and for the elite of the
elite. The hierarchica l principl e is also found in later theories of
saintship, an d it is a typical facet of Shia thought as well. Imam
Jacfar allude d to a structure of mystica l experienc e that leads in
twelve stage s from source to source, which looks like a preparatio n
for the stations through which the Sufi initiate has to pass on the
Path. Som e of Jacfar's hermeneuti c principle s seem to contain
thoughts tha t were, until recently , ascribed to later mystics; he even
analyzed th e "theopathi c locutions, " the so-calle d shathiydt,  in
which the mystic utters words that he should not say. Jacfar's mode l
case for such an experienc e is the conversatio n between Moses and
God on Mount Sinai (Sura 20:11-21) .
Moses wa s the prophet who heard God—hear d His voice speaking
in him and through him; but Muhamma d was blessed with the
vision of God during his ascension—h e entered the intimate prox-
imity of the beloved , and here, as Jacfar's moder n interprete r states,
"the languag e of experienc e become s the languag e of love" (W 187).
That mean s that before the time of Rabi ca the first steps were taken
in the directio n of an authenti c love mysticism . The definitio n of
divine lov e as given by Jacfar, and often repeated by later mystics, is
this: "a divine fire that devours man completely " (W 187).

--- Page 65 ---
42 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
SOME MYSTICAL LEADERS OF THE LATE NINTH CENTURY
The discoverie s about the earliest Sufis show that some of
the definition s attribute d to mystics of the ninth century can prob-
ably be dated much earlier. They also show how Shia and Sufi ideas
were, at that early stage, interdependent . But many problem s still
await solution . The thought s of Jacfar and, perhaps , other early mys-
tical thinker s must have been at work beneath the surface , per-
meating th e mystica l life until they appeare d in the sayings of a
number o f Sufis, all near contemporaries , who reveal the potentia l
variety withi n the mystica l life. I refer to Dhu Dn-Nun th e Egyptia n
(d. 859), Bayezid Bistam i the Iranian (d. 874), Yahya ibn Mu cadh
from Ray y (d. 871), and al-Harit h al-Muhasib i the Iraqi (d. 857).
DhuDn-Nun i s one of the most attractiv e and intriguin g figures in
the histor y of early Sufism, aptly called "one of the most eminent of
their hidde n spiritualists " (H 100). Thauba n ibn Ibrahim , sur-
named Dhu Dn-Nun, "h e with the fish," was born of Nubian parents
in Ikhmi m in Upper Egypt; he studied religiou s sciences and is re-
ported to have transmitte d tradition s from Malik ibn Anas, the
founder o f the Maliki law school. Dhu^n-Nu n was "the unique [au-
thority] o f his time in scholarshi p and piety and mystica l state and
culture" ( Q 8). During the Muctazilite persecutio n of the orthodo x
he, too, was imprisoned , because of his belief in the doctrin e that
the Koran was uncreated ; the caliph Mutawakkil , however , deeply
impressed b y one of his sermons , set him free. He was accused of
being a philosophe r and an alchemist , and the genuinenes s of his
mystical stat e was sometime s doubted ; Ibn an-Nadim Ds Fihrist  (2:
862) in the tenth century mention s two of his works among alchem -
istic scriptures . We know little about his life, and his teaching s are
still scattere d in the hagiographi c books. Ibrahim al-Qassar , who
saw him in his childhood , remember s that he was disappointe d by
the great mystica l leader who was outwardl y so humble and meek,
but Dhu Dn-Nun reproache d the boy, whose thought s he had read by
means of his inner power (N 166). Many miracle s are ascribed to
him, and in strange legends he figures as a kind of magicia n whom
men and jinn obeyed . It is said that "he travele d the road of
blame." Bu t when he died, legend asserts, "it was written on his
forehead: 'Thi s is the friend of God, he died in love of God, slain
by God' " (H 100). This love of God has been expresse d in one of his

--- Page 66 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 43
sayings (whic h has also been attribute d to other mystics because it
shows ver y well the inclinatio n of the early Sufis to speak in allu-
sions withou t divulgin g the secret of their loving intimac y with
God): "O  God!  Publicly  I call Thee  'My Lord,'  but in solitude  I
call Thee 'O my Beloved'! " (A 9:332). Accordin g to the tradition ,
DhuDn-Nun formulate d for the first time a theory of mcfrifa, intui-
tive knowledg e of God, or gnosis, as opposed to cilm, discursiv e
learning an d knowledge ; many sayings about "love" and "intimacy "
are also attribute d to him. However , we would scarcely agree with
Edward G . Browne, who consider s him "the first to give to the ear-
lier asceticis m the definitel y pantheisti c bent and quasi-eroti c ex-
pression whic h we recogniz e as the chief characteristic s of Sufism." 20
Nicholson wa s inclined to accept Neoplatoni c influence s upon
Dhu'n-Nun. Sinc e this mystic lived in Egypt, where Neoplatoni c
and hermeti c tradition s were in the air, and was regarded by some
of his contemporarie s as a "philosopher, " he may well have been
acquainted wit h some Neoplatoni c ideas. In a famous passage, he
has describe d the gnostic (cdrif), the true mystic with spiritua l in-
sight; but we do not find a "philosophical " approac h in these words
of his:
The gnosti c becomes more humble every hour, for every hour is drawing
him neare r to God. The gnostic s see without knowledge , without sight,
without informatio n received , and withou t observation , without de-
scription, withou t veiling and without veil. They are not themselves , but
in so far as they exist at all they exist in God. Their movement s are
caused by  God,  and their  words  are the words  of God which  are uttered
by their tongues, and their sight is the sight of God, which has entered
into their eyes. So God Most High has said: "When I love a servant, I,
the Lord, am his ear so that he hears by Me, I am his eye, so that he sees
by Me, and I am his tongue so that he speaks by Me, and I am his hand,
so that he takes by Me." 21
This last-quote d hadlth qudsi, 2'2 an extra-Korani c word attribute d
to God, forms one of the cornerstone s of mystical teaching in Sufism:
man is, through acts of supererogator y piety, slowly lifted above his
own base qualitie s and instead distinguishe d by the good qualitie s
seen in God, until he completel y lives in Him and through Him.
Dhvr'n-Nun's allege d "philosophical-gnostic " characte r is not re-
20. Edwar d G. Browne , A Literary  History  of Persia,  4 vols. (1902; reprint ed.,
Cambridge, 1957) , 2:505.
21. Margare t Smith, Readings  from the Mystics of Islam (London , 1950), no. 20; see
A 9:385 ff.
zs.Sahih al-Bukhan,  ed. L. Krehl and W. Juynbol l (Leiden , 1862-1908) , 4:231.

--- Page 67 ---
44 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
fleeted in another of his sayings either: "I knew God by God, and
I knew what is besides God by the Messenge r of God" (L 104). "The
sign of the lover of God is to follow the Friend of God, i.e., the
Prophet, i n his morals, and his deeds and his orders and his cus-
toms" (T 1:125).
Stories connecte d with the Greates t Name of God are told_abou t
this mystic ; but his reply in the followin g anecdote reveals the pious
Muslim rathe r than a man who relies upon magical practice: "One
said to Dhu Dn-Nun: 'Sho w me the Greates t Name of God.' He said:
'Show me the smalles t one!'—an d scolded him" 23 Dhu Dn-Nun em -
phasized God' s incredibl e majesty and power and, inspired by two
of the Koranic names of God, al-muhyi,  "He who bestows life," and
al-mumit, "H e who kills," he appropriatel y describe d the state of
the mystic : "Nothin g sees God and dies, even as nothing sees God
and lives, because His life is everlasting , and who ever sees Him, re-
mains in Him and is made everlasting " (A 9:373). The theories of
fand and baqd, "annihilation , extinction, " and "everlastin g life,
duration" i n God, central topics of Sufism, are develope d here out
of the Koranic context.
DhuDn-Nun, lik e most of the mystics, often juxtapose d the divine
qualities an d names. Jamdl, "eternal beauty, " and jaldl, "eternal
majesty," coincidin g in kamdl, "eternal perfection, " are the quali-
ties of Him who must be addresse d as "Thou art who Thou art,
eternally, i n eternity." 24 God, the eternal perfectio n to which no
created bein g has access, reveals Himself to man under the aspects
of beauty and fascination , kindness and mercy, or under the aspects
of majesty and wrath, power and revenge . More than a thousand
years afte r Dhu Dn-Nun, th e German theologia n Rudolf Otto has
built up a theologica l system based upon the contrast between the
mysterium tremendum  and the mysterium  fascinans,  which consti-
tute the two main qualitie s of the Numen ; he has, thus, expresse d
in scientifi c languag e a truth that had been known to every Sufi in
the world of Islam for centuries . Dhu'n-Nu n frequentl y dwelt upon
the qualit y of majesty, jaldl, the tremendum,  in God—an approac h
typical of early Islamic thought . That is why he believed afflictio n
to be indispensabl e to man's spiritua l development ; it is the "salt
23.cAbdul Wahha b ash-Sha crani, Lawaqih  al-anwar  al-qudsiyya  (Cairo, 1311 h./
1893-94). P - 144-
24. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Mystics  of Islam (1914; reprint ed., Chester Springs ,
Pa., 1962) , p. 183.

--- Page 68 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 45
of the faithful, and when the salt lacks, the faithful becomes rotten"
(A 9:373) . The faithful lover enjoys the tribulation s sent by his
beloved, a s DhuDn-Nun ha s said; but the great mystic disliked those
who turne d this attitude into a mere show: "When one of his
brethren, a  so-called lover, was boasting during his illness: 'Who
suffers fro m the pain which God sends him, does not love God,' he
replied: ' I would rather say: "He who boasts of his love of God,
does not love Him" ' " (T 1:123).
One of the most attractiv e aspects of Dhu Dn-Nun is his poetic
talent and his wonderfu l comman d of the Arabic language . He
composed small , charmin g poems— a new developmen t in Sufism,
although Rabi ca is credited with a few poetica l exclamations . He
praised th e Lord in long, hymnlik e poems and popularize d a kind
of romanti c mystica l story, a literary type often found in later hagio-
graphic works . He told how he wandere d along the Nile, or
strolled alon e in the desert, when suddenl y he would meet a strang-
er who revealed to him mysterie s of the Path: "He met a woman
at the sea shore and asked her: 'What is the end of love?' And she
answered: ' O simpleton , love has no end.' And he asked: 'Why?'
She said: 'Because the Beloved has no end' " (T i: 123). This story is
typical of DhuDn-Nun's tendenc y to introduc e a dramatic elemen t
into the discussio n of complicate d problem s that cannot be re-
solved throug h intellectua l efforts. The answer of the unknow n
woman (i n other cases it may be a slave girl, a negro, or an old
anchorite) point s immediatel y to the heart of the matter: since
love is the essence of the divine, it is, like God Himself , without
beginning an d withou t end.
The romanti c and poetic aspect of Dhu'n-Nu n can be understoo d
best from his prayers. The Koran asserts that everythin g created
worships God ; everythin g utters praise and thanks to its creator in
its own tongue, which may be the human voice, the hummin g of
the bee, the growing of the leaves, the scent of the flower, or just
the lisdn ul-hdl, the "state of speaking by itself," someone' s whole
attitude. Th e created world gains, thus, a religious meaning— a
meaning tha t the early ascetics had lost sight of because they con-
sidered it to be a detestabl e veil that distracte d them from God.
But for DhuDn-Nun an d the generation s of Sufis followin g him, the
worth or  worthlessness  of the world  is determined  not by itself,  but
by man's relation to it. It is again regarde d as God's creation and

--- Page 69 ---
46 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
thus as somethin g dependen t upon Him and belongin g to Him.
That is how Dhu Dn-Nun felt :
O God, I never hearken to the voices of the beasts or the rustle of the
trees, the splashin g of the waters or the song of the birds, the whistlin g
of the wind or the rumble of the thunder , but I sense in them a testimony
to Thy Unity, and a proof of Thy incomparability , that Thou art the
All-Prevailing, th e All-Knowing , the All-True . (A 9:342)
Such psalmlik e prayers of praise, in beautiful , rhythmi c rhyme-
prose are unforgettable , and they deeply impresse d the mystica l
writers o f later centuries . The great poets of Iran understoo d the
language o f the flowers and birds as clearly as Dhu 3n-Nun; th e
proems o f cAttar's epic s translat e this praise of the creature s into
human poetica l language , and he was able to expres s the silent
yearning o f all creature s in the forty chapter s of his Musibatnama.
DhuDn-Nun's compatrio t Shacranl, the last great mystic of Egypt in
the sixteent h century , tells a story that remind s the reader immedi -
ately of Dhu Dn-Nun's hymni c praise:
Whoever recollect s God in reality, forgets all else besides Him, because
all the creature s recollec t Him, as is witnesse d by those who experienc e a
revelation (kashf).  I experience d this state from evenin g prayer until one
third of the nigh t was over, and I heard the voices of the creature s in the
praise of God, with elevated voices so that I feared for my mind. I heard
the fishes who said: Praised be the King, the Most Holy, the Lord. 25
The late thirteenth-centur y mystica l poet Yunus Emre, who de-
clared tha t he would praise the Lord togethe r with the stones and the
fountains, wit h the gazelles and with the prophets , was just as faith-
ful an interprete r of the Korani c words that everythin g was create d
in order to worshi p and praise the Creato r as was his seventeenth -
century compatrio t Merkez Efendi, about whom a charmin g story
was told to me by Turkis h friends :
The sheikh  of the Khalvat i order in Istanbul , Siinbiil Efendi, in looking
for a successor , sent his disciple s forth to get flowers to adorn the con-
vent. All of them returne d with large bunches of lovely flowers; only one
of them—Merke z Efendi—cam e back with a small, withered plant. When
asked why he did not bring anythin g worthy of his master, he answered :
"I found all the flowers busy recollectin g the Lord—ho w could I inter-
rupt this constan t prayer of theirs? I looked, and lo, one flower had
finished it s recollection . That one I brought. " It was he who became th e
successor o f Siinbiil Efendi, and one of the cemeterie s along the Byzan-
tine wall of Istanbul still bears his name.
The poeti c aspect of Dhu'n-Nu n has been highlighte d becaus e
25. Ash-Sha cranI, Lawaqih,  p. 156. See also the descriptio n of Kazarun i in T 2:295.

--- Page 70 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 47
that is most conspicuou s in his sayings. A detailed study of his life
and work would, in all probability , reveal many previousl y un-
known aspect s of his teaching s and show whethe r he was, indeed,
the first "theosophist " among the Sufis or rather the hymnodis t
who rediscovere d the divine glory as praised by the creatures . In
later time s DhuDn-Nun becam e a subject of tales and legends .
Another earl y saint has been almost completel y transforme d
into a kind of Sufi symbol—Ab u Yazid (Bayezid ) Bistami (d. 874). 26
His personalit y looms large on the horizon of early Persian Sufism.
Few mystic s have impresse d and perplexe d their contemporarie s
and successiv e generation s as much as this ascetic from the little
place know n as Bistam (Bastam ) in northwester n Iran. Strange
experiences an d great faith are ascribed to him. His theopathi c
locutions an d paradoxe s attracte d another , though very different ,
mystic, Junay d (d. 910), the leader of the Baghda d school, who,
however, hel d that Bayezid had not reached the final goal of the
seeker.
Numerous attempt s at explainin g Bayezld' s personalit y and his
enigmatic utterance s have been made in Europe . The finest one
is the short and penetratin g study by Hellmu t Ritter. R. C. Zaehner
has stresse d the possibilit y of Indian influence s upon Bayezid . The
import of the story that Bayezld' s mystica l master was a certain
Abu CAH as-Sindi , i.e., from Sind, is still doubtful ; even if this man
had been from the lower Indus valley and not from a village called
Sind close to Bistam, it seems scarcely possible to draw far-reachin g
consequences fro m this geographica l fact: not every man from Sind
could be expecte d to know all the intricacie s of Hindu monisti c
philosophy. I t is, of course, tempting to imagine such an acquaint -
ance with Vedanti c speculation s on the part of Bayezid, and some of
the equation s brought forth by Zaehner seem very plausible ; yet it
seems mor e likely that the mystic of Bistam should have reached
his goal by means of the Islamic experienc e of fand, annihilation ,
as he formulate d it for the first time, rather than by an experienc e
26. Hellmu t Ritter, "Die Ausspriich e des Bayezid Bistami, " in Westostliche  Abhand-
lungen, Festschrift  fur Rudolf Tschudi,  ed. Fritz Meier (Wiesbaden , 1954). Reynold A.
Nicholson, "A n Early Arabic Version of the Micraj of Abu Yazid al-Bistami, " Islamica
2 (1925). On possibl e Indian influence s see Robert C. Zaehner , Hindu and Muslim
Mysticism (London , 1960), and the critical article by M. cAbdur Rabb , "The Proble m
of Possibl e Indian Influenc e on Abu Yazid al-Bistami, " Journal  of the Pakistan  His-
torical Society,  January 1972. cAbdur Rahma n Badawl , Shatahdt  as-sufiyya,  I: Abu
Yazid al-Bistami  (Cairo, 1949).

--- Page 71 ---
48 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
that, in the Vedanti c sense, would have led him to an extensio n of
the atman,  "the innermos t self," until it realizes its unity with the
essence of everythin g as expresse d in the words tat twam asi, "that
is you." Bayezld hoped for a complete extinctio n of the traces of
self, not for an extensio n of anythin g created (cf. MM 56). The
negative wa y is his; but he was also the first to describe the mystical
experience i n terms of the image of the mfraj, the heavenl y journey
of the Prophet . His sayings burn with hopeless longing and possess
a weird beauty, and they are often frightenin g in their powerfu l
imagery. Hi s yearnin g is absolute , and so is his disappointment .
Bayezid's nephew , to whom we owe the transmissio n of many
of his sayings , once asked him about his renunciation , and he
answered:
Renunciation (zuhd)  has no value. I was three days in renunciation , on
the fourth day I had finished it. The first day I renounce d this world,
the second day I renounce d the Otherworld , the third day I renounce d
everything sav e God; when the fourth day came, nothing was left to me
but God. I reached a desperate longing. Then I heard a voice addressin g
me: "O Bayezld , you are not strong enough to endure with Me alone." I
said: "Tha t is exactly what I want." Then the voice said: "You have
found, you have found!" (T i: 167)
God is so overwhelmin g that man become s nothing even when
thinking o f His name or pronouncin g the word Allah with proper
awe: "Bayezl d once uttered the call to prayer and fainted . When
he came to his senses he said: 'It is amazing that a man does not die
when utterin g the call to prayer.' "27 But then, how are we to under-
stand his descriptio n of his flight beyond space three times thirty
thousand years—unti l eventuall y he found nothing but Bayezld in
the divine throne and behind the veil that hides God? And again
there is his reply to someone who asked him: When does man reach
God? "O you miserabl e one—doe s he reach Him at all?" 28 One of
his mystica l friends—th e tradition s about the name differ—sen t him
a prayer rug on which to pray; but he answered : "I have put to-
gether the worship of the inhabitant s of the heavens and the seven
earths an d put it into a pillow and put that pillow under my
cheek" (T i: 144). And at other times, when somebod y came to see
him, he replied: "I myself am in search of Bayezld." 29
His sentence s are paradoxes , wrapped in wonderfu l imagery : for
27. Ritter , "Bayezid, " in Westostliche  Abhandlungen,  ed. Meier, p. 234.
28. Ibid., p. 240.
29.Ibid.

--- Page 72 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 49
twelve year s he was the blacksmit h of his self until he made of
himself a  pure mirror (T 1:139) ; he saw "longing " as a palace in
which the sword "horror of separation " is placed and a narcissus
stem 'union " given in the hand of hope—bu t even after seven
thousand year s the narcissu s is fresh and green, for no one has ever
attained i t (T i: 166).
Bayezld migh t acknowledg e at one momen t that he eventuall y
found tha t God had remembere d him before he remembere d God,
knew him before he had known Him, and that God's love of man
precedes man' s love of God (A 10:34); but at another momen t the
same Bayezl d sighs:
As soon as I attained to His Unity I became a bird with a body of One-
ness arid wings of Everlastingness , and I continue d flying in the air of
Quality fo r ten years, until I reached an atmospher e a million times as
large, and I flew on, until I found myself in the field of Eternity and I
saw there the Tree of Oneness. . .. And I looked, and I knew that all this
was a cheat.
Then again , he exclaimed , with the pride of one who had found
his goal:
He got up once and put me before Himself and addresse d me: "O Baye-
zld, my creature s desire to behold thee." So I said: "Adorn me with Thy
Unity and dress me with Thy I-ness and raise me to Thy Oneness so that,
when Thy creature s see me, they may say: We have seen Thee, and it is
Thou and I am no longer there." (L 382)
It must have been in such a state of rapture that Bayezld said:
"Subhdm—Praise b e to Me, how great is My Majesty! " This typical
shath has puzzled many later mystics and has often been .repeate d
by the poets of Iran and Turkey and Muslim India as proof of the
unitive stat e reached by the perfecte d mystic. Sarraj, to give one
example o f moderat e Sufi interpretation , understand s Bayezld to
be talkin g "as if he were reciting the Koranic word: T am God, there
is no Crod besides Me' " (Sura 20:14) (L 390)—whic h is certainl y a
mild explanation . Bayezld came to attain this state by an austere
via negationis  and constan t mortification , by emptyin g himself of
himself, unti l he had reached , at least for a moment , the world of
absolute unit y where, as he said, lover, beloved , and love are one
(T i: 160), and where he himself is the wine, the wine-drinker , and
the cupbeare r (T i: 159)—a formulatio n used by later Persian poets
in their hymns praising the purifyin g and transformin g power of
divine love .

--- Page 73 ---
50 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
A strange figure of dark fire, Bayezid stands lonely in early Ira-
nian Sufism . His paradoxe s constantl y yield new meaning , yet they
continue t o be elusive—unles s the reader were to share the mystic's
experience. O r would one, then, return and claim with Bayezid
that "everythin g was a cheat"?
Whatever th e experience s of the mystic from Bistam were, his
personality inspire d many later writers. His name occurs, in poetry,
more frequentl y than that of any other mystic, with the exceptio n
of "Mansur " Hallaj, with whom he was sometime s associated , al-
though Halla j believed that "poor Abu Yazld" had arrived only at
the threshol d of the divine (P 250). The poets could easily contrast
his unflinchin g faith and deep religiou s engagemen t with the
"infidelity o f Yazld" (playing on the similarit y of their names); the
second Omayya d caliph Yazld was responsibl e for the tragedy of
Kerbela, i n which the Prophet' s grandso n was killed, together with
his family , in 680, and his name has become anathem a to every
pious Muslim . Thus SanaDI asks:
Who ever agreed with the Yazld "base soul,"
how could he know the state of Bayezid?
(S 632)
For the "soul that inspires evil" is similar to the cruel enemy of the
Prophet's famil y and thus stands in contrast to the great mystical
leader. "Bayezi d of his time" has become an honorar y epithet for
a man of outstandin g mystica l piety, and Sufi pretender s have been
warned "no t to make themselve s Bayezids " (M 6:2548) . In his
Mathnawl, Rum l tells the legend that Bayezid' s disciples rebelled
against hi m when he exclaimed : "Under my garment there is noth-
ing but God!" But when they tried to kill him, the strokes of their
knives wounde d themselve s (M 4:2102-40) , for the perfect saint is
a pure mirror who reflects the attribute s of others to them. In an-
other passag e he relates the story of a Zoroastria n who refused to
accept Isla m because he felt too weak to embrace a religion that had
produced spiritua l heroes like Bayezid (T i: 149; M 5:3358)— a story
that has been taken over, in our day, by Muhamma d Iqbal in his
Jdwidndme (1932) , where it serves to assert the spiritua l strength
of the Islamic religion and the true Muslims .
There are still sacred places dedicate d to the memory of the
lonely mysti c of Bistam in the remotes t corners of the Islamic

--- Page 74 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 51
world: in Zousfan a in the Maghre b and in Chittagon g in Bangla
Desh, wher e huge, whitish turtles inhabit a tank to which people
come to obtain blessing s for themselve s and for their children .
Sufi hagiograph y often mention s a letter sent to Bayezld by
Yahya ibn Mucadh, who wrote: '"I am intoxicate d from having
drunk so deeply of the cup of His love.'—Ab u Yazid wrote to him
in reply: 'Someon e else has drunk up the seas of Heaven and earth,
but his thirst is not yet slaked: his tongue is hanging out and he is
crying "Is there any more?" ' " (A 10:40). Bayezid' s metaphysica l
thirst has never been quenched ; he belongs to those who,
even if they would drink every day seven seas of union from this goblet,
they woul d say from thirst to thirst:
Standing i n the water, athirst
and not being granted a drink ....
(B 442)
His corresponden t Yahya ibn Mu cadh ar-Raz i was a completel y
different type , personifyin g another major trend in early Sufism.
Yahya cam e from Rayy (near present Tehran) , lived for a while
in Balkh, and died, in 871, in Nishapur , "and he spoke constantl y
about hope " (Q 16). Accordin g to Hujwiri , he was the author of
many books—whic h seem to be lost—an d his sayings "are delicatel y
moulded an d pleasan t to the ear and subtle in substanc e and profit-
able in  devotion"  (H 122).  Indeed,  the scattered  words  and short
poems tha t have come down to us from the "preache r Yahya" are
pleasantly differen t in style from the utterance s of the Khurasania n
and the Baghdadia n Sufis. He was mainly a preacher who called
people to God, and, although a number of Sufis are related to have
preached i n public, he is the only one to be distinguishe d by the
title al-wcfiz,  "the preacher. " He also talked about divine love, and
to him is ascribed the famous saying: "Real love does not diminish
by the cruelty of the beloved , nor does it grow by His grace, but is
always the same" (A 10:58)—a n idea that has been worked out by
the Persia n poets to its final consequences .
Yahya hel d that "one mustard seed of love is better than seventy
years of worship without love" (T i: 306). Religion is, for him, hope
in God, whose mercy is infinite and who listens to the prayer of the
human heart .
The preache r from Rayy once spoke about the differenc e between

--- Page 75 ---
52 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
the perso n who comes to attend a banquet for the sake of the ban-
quet and the one who attends in the hope of meeting his friend;
such is the differenc e betwee n the ascetic who longs for Paradis e
for the sake of joy and bliss and the lover who hopes for the beatific
vision of his eternal beloved (P 516). Yahya spoke the oft-repeate d
word: "Deat h is beautiful , for it joins the friend with the Friend! "
(T 1:308) . The most characteristi c expressio n of Yahya's piety is the
reflection, i n a number of his prayers , of an almost "evangelical "
trust in the compassionat e God. In dialectica l form, they show the
contrast betwee n the helples s sinner and the Almight y Lord who
can forgiv e His miserabl e creature s out of His inexhaustibl e trea-
sure of mercy:
O God, Thou hast sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh the rebel and said,
"Talk mildl y with him"—O God, this is Thy kindnes s towards one who
claimed to be God; how, then, is Thy kindnes s towards one who is Thy
servant ou t of his innermos t soul?... O God, I fear Thee because I am a
slave, and I hope in Thee because Thou art the Lord! . . . O God, how
should I not hope in Thee, while Thou art merciful , and how should I
not fear Thee because Thou art powerful ? O God, how can I call upon
Thee, bein g a rebellious slave, and how could I not call upon Thee who
art a merciful Lord? (T 1:309-10 )
Yahya deepl y trusted in God's forgiveness , which can cover every
sin, for no matter how near perfect a man may be, sinning is part
of human nature : "O God, though I can not refrain from sin,
Thou cans t forgive sins" (T 1:310) . And this God will lead him
eventually t o the place that He chooses out of His loving-kindness :
"O God, I have done nothing for Paradise , and I have no strengt h
to endure Hell—everythin g is left to Thy mercy! " (T 1:310) . The
preacher fro m Rayy stands amazed and overwhelme d before the
mystery o f divine love—is it not the greates t miracle of grace that
God, the ever rich who needs nothing , should love men? How, then,
should man , who is so much in need of God, not love Him? He
sums up his whole feeling in one short prayer: "Forgiv e me, for I
belong to Thee" (T 1:310).
Among Yahya' s successors—thoug h not exclusivel y his disciples -
there are two main ones in central and western Iran who are men-
tioned by later authors. His disciple in Nishapu r was Abu cUthman
al-HIrl (d . 910), who had been educate d in part by Shah Kirman i
in the spiritua l traditio n of Khurasan . Al-HIri is regarde d as one
of the great leaders of his time, who establishe d Sufism in Nishapur ;
but he was criticize d by some contemporarie s for thinkin g too

--- Page 76 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 53
much of the purificatio n of the soul without turning his views
exclusively t o God. He is regarded as one of the first to introduc e
a strict system of educatio n for his disciples , a trend that develope d
finally int o the perinde  ac cadaver  obedienc e that distinguishe s
later Sufi education. 30 The second master of Rayy is Yusuf ibn
Husayn ar-Raz i (d. 916), who belongs to the line of the ascetic Abu
Turab an d who seems to have met DhuDn-Nun in his early years. He
is credited with sayings about ikhlas, "perfect sincerity, " as well as
with sentence s about the constan t recollectio n of God.
Rabica ushere d in a new and productiv e period in the develop -
ment of the mystica l life in Iraq. Among the many Sufis who lived
and worke d in the capital, Baghdad , as well as in other Iraqian
cities, mentio n must be made of RabiVs younger contemporar y
Macruf al-Karkh i (d. 815). Legends speak of his strong mystica l
power; hi s prayers were heard, and after his death people from
Baghdad woul d cross the Tigris to the section of Karkh and pray
for rain at his tomb. He was among the first to speak about divine
love, and his teaching that one cannot learn love, for it is a divine
gift and not an acquisitio n (T 1:272), has had a great impact on
mystical thought . Qushayr i attribute s to Macruf specia l strength in
ridd, perfec t contentmen t with God's decrees (Q 9).
Macruf's discipl e Sari as-Saqati , "the huckster " (d. circa 867),
gratefully acknowledge d that his teacher' s blessing s had enabled
him to achieve high spiritua l rank. The biographer s claim that
Sari was the first to discuss the various mystica l states (ahwdl],  a
central topi c of mystica l writers. His piety and scrupulosit y are
reflected i n the remark that he was afraid that his nose might turn
black becaus e of his sins. In his meeting s he used to discuss topics
of mystica l love, which he was apparentl y the first to define as "real
mutual lov e between man and God"— a scandal to the orthodox ,
who accepte d "love of God" only in the sense of obedience . Also
attributed t o Sari are sayings about the problem of tauhld, "to de-
clare that God is one," which was later elaborate d by his disciple
and nephe w Junayd . A delightfu l episode preserve d in the Nafahdt
al-uns reveal s the great Sufi leader in a very human light : "During
his illness people used to visit him and would ask him for his bless-
ings and prayers , and he, eventuall y exhausted , taught them to
30. For the whole problem see Fritz Meier, "Hurasa n und das Ende der klassische n
Sufik," in La Persia nel medioevo  (Rome, 1971).

--- Page 77 ---
54 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
pray: 'O God, teach us how to behave when visiting the sick' "
(N 54; A 10:122).
During thos e years when Sari was discussin g the mystica l stages,
his compatrio t al-Harit h al-Muhasib i (d. 857) was writing his fun-
damental book s on mystica l psychology. 31 Born in Basra in 781, he
was probabl y influence d by the teaching s of Hasan al-Basri' s fol-
lowers. Muhasib i belonge d to the Shafi ci school of law, as did Ju-
nayd, Rudhbari , and many other Sufis; but he also acquire d the
theological an d philosophica l vocabular y of the Muctazila—which
brought criticis m from the Hanbalites . Yet the study of Muctazilite
theological method s gave him greate r eloquence,  and it is he who
gave Sufis m a highly develope d technica l language .
Muhasibi—whose surnam e is derived from muhdsaba,  the con-
stant analysi s of even the most secret motions of the soul and the
heart—taught th e relentles s fight against man's lower nature, not
just the outwar d struggl e of the ascetic against the "flesh," but a
subtle psychologica l analysis of every though t as well as uninter -
rupted spiritua l training . Such training , of course, goes along with
utmost scrupulosity . Muhasib i claimed to have a nerve in his
finger tha t would warn him wheneve r food was not perfectl y clean
legally (N 572). He has describe d very eloquentl y the state of the
seeker of the path to God:
God has appointe d self-mortificatio n for the seeker, for the training of
his soul. Men are ignoran t of the high station of that one who is preoccu-
pied with his Lord, who is seen to be thinking little of this world, who is
humble, fearful , sorrowful , weeping , showing a meek spirit, keeping far
from the childre n of this world, suffering oppressio n and not seeking
revenge, despoiled , yet not desiring requital . He is dishevelled , dusty,
shabby, think s little of what he wears, wounded , alone, a stranger—bu t
if the ignoran t man were to look upon the heart of that seeker, and see
how God has fulfilled in him what He promise d of His favor and what
He gives Him for exchang e for that which he renounce s of the vain
glory of the world and its pleasure , he would desire to be in that one's
place, and would realise that it is he, the seeker after God, who is truly
rich, and fair to look upon, who tastes delight, who is joyous and happy,
for he has attained his desire and has secured that which he sought from
his Lord. 32
Muhasibi's subtl e analysi s of riyd, "hypocrisy, " and his whole meth-
31. Margare t Smith, An Early Mystic of Baghdad  (London , 1935). Joseph van Ess,
Die Gedankenwelt  des Hdrit al-Muhasibi,  anhand von Ubersetzungen  aus seinen
Schriften dargestellt  und erlautert  (Bonn, 1961), is an excellen t analysis of Muhasibi' s
teachings. Som e of Muhasibi' s works have been edited; these are listed under his name
in the Bibliography .
32. Smith , Readings,  no. 12.

--- Page 78 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 55
odological approac h became fundamenta l and indispensabl e to the
early Sufis ; Ghazzall , the master of moderat e medieva l mysticism ,
depends largel y upon him.
Among th e disciple s of Sari as-Saqatl , Abu Bakr al-Kharra z (d.
899) is known in the West through Arberry' s translatio n of his
Kitdb as-sidq,  "The Book of Truthfulness." 33 His mystica l hints,
ishdrat, see m to have influence d Junayd. Traditio n credits him
with havin g been the first to discuss the theory of fand, "annihila -
tion,' and baqd, "permanen t life in God." Recentl y discovere d
documents revea l that he can be regarded as one of Junayd's masters
and that he contribute d to mystica l psycholog y in his Kitdb al-
fardgh, whic h has been analyze d by Pere Nwyia (W 240 ff.).
Nwyia ha s also brought to light Kharraz' s importanc e for the
definition o f tauhld, in which he anticipate s some of Junayd's and
even Hallaj' s ideas: "Only God has the right to say 'I,' for whoever
says 'I' will not reach the level of gnosis." That is why Satan was
punished, fo r he said, "/ am better than Adam," and that is why
the angels had to prostrat e themselve s before Adam, for they had
claimed, ''We  are higher than he." The only true subject is, in fact,
God. Kharra z goes even further by showing that this divine "I" is
ontologically connecte d with the divine name al-Haqq,  "the Real-
ity"—this seem s to be the nucleus of Hallaj's famous phrase and^l-
Haqq (W 249). From these theories we can understan d how cAbdul-
lah-i Ansari , the leading mystic and hagiographe r of Herat in the
eleventh century , could make the remark: "Abu Sacld [sic] Kharraz
would hav e needed a trifle lameness , for nobody could walk along
with him" (N 74).
Kharraz wa s writing a treatise on saintshi p at almost the same
time that Sahl at-Tustar i (d. 896) was discussin g the problem of
saintship an d Tirmidh i was working on his book Khatm al-auliya 3,
"The Seal of Saints." This coincidenc e indicate s that during the last
two or three decades of the ninth century the necessit y for a
systematization o f mystica l thought was being felt, and that the
problem o f sanctity and saintshi p was one of the central ones at the
time.
Sahl's nam e stands for a certain tendenc y that was rejected in
part by subsequen t generations . It is, however , difficult to find
heterodox trend s in the teaching s of this apparentl y introverte d
33. Abu Bakr al-Kharraz , Kitdb as-sidq,  The Book of Truthfulness,  ed. and trans.
A. J. Arberry (Oxford , 1937).

--- Page 79 ---
56 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
ascetic, wh o was praised by Junayd as "the proof of the Sufis" (QR
59). He had spent a couple of years in the ascetic settlemen t at
Abbadan an d was eventuall y exiled to Basra. His most frequentl y
cited theor y is that of the obligator y characte r of repentance , which
should be a permanen t state in the faithful . This austere outlook
fits the ascetic life in which Sahl tried to combin e tawakkul  and
work; for , as he thought , it would be an offense to the Propheti c tra-
dition to avoid or condem n work as a means of gaining one's liveli-
hood, but an offense against the faith to neglect "trust in God." 34
Sahl tried to remain aloof from the theologica l discussion s that
had shake n the Muslim communit y in the precedin g decades ; he
advocated th e duty of obeying the politica l ruler. Instead, he retired
into the sweetnes s of his inner life and found there the peace that
the disturbe d outwar d world could not give him. He wrote an ex-
tensive commentar y on the Koran in which he discusse d the four-
fold meanin g of each verse. His theories of saintlines s are highly
interesting: h e spoke of a pillar of light formed from the souls of
those who are predestine d to become saints—i t was the time in both
Sufi and Shia circles that theories about the preexisten t light of
Muhammad wer e being developed , and other mystics had put forth
the theor y that the souls of the true lovers belong to a divine light.
According t o Sahl, only the saints are predestine d to attain the
mystery o f lordliness , sirr ar-rubublya—here  lies, probably , one
source o f Hallaj's similar theories , for Hallaj had lived with
Sahl for a while.
Sahl's teachin g was continue d by his disciple Ibn Salim (d. 909);
hence thei r school was known as the Salimiyya . The author of the
first comprehensiv e manual of Sufism, Abu Talib al-Makki , be-
longed to this group.
Sahl's younge r contemporar y at-Tirmidh i develope d peculia r
ideas abou t sainthood. 35 Tirmidh i is surname d al-Hakim,  "the phi-
losopher," whic h points to the fact that through him Hellenisti c
philosophical idea s were penetratin g Sufism. Tirmidh i died early
in the tenth century in Mecca, where he lived after the study of
34. Cihad Tune, "Sahl ibn cAbdullah at-Tustar l und die Salimiya " (Ph. D. diss.,
University o f Bonn, 1970). Tune is a Turkish theologian ; his discussio n o£ Sahl is not
fully satisfactory .
35. Osma n Yahya, "L'oeuvr e de TirmidI , essai bibliographique, " Melanges  Louis
Massignon, 3  vols. (Damascus , 1956-57) , 3:41^.; Nichola s Heer, "Some Biographica l
and Bibliographica l Notes on al-Haki m at-Tirmidhi, " in The World of Islam: Studies
in Honour  of Philip K. Hitti, ed. R. Bailey Winder and James C. Kritzeck (London ,
1960).

--- Page 80 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 57
Shafiite la w in Balkh and a prolonged stay in Iraq. He, too, wrote
a commentar y on the Koran "in the light of the question s which
his own experienc e posed to him and which he interprete d in a
vocabulary enriche d by the philosophica l rapport and the experi-
ences of the earlier mystics" (W 156). He thus gave the words a
more profoun d meaning , and it is significan t that the founder of
the Naqshband i order in the fourteent h century attribute d to him
a particula r power when the disciple undergoe s the process of di-
recting hi s concentratio n toward the spirit of one of the great mas-
ters (N 119).
Tirmidhi's mai n contributio n to the theor y of Sufism is probably
his "Seal of the Saints," in which he develope d the terminolog y of
sainthood tha t has been used since that time. The leader of the
Sufi hierarch y is the qutb, "pole" or "pivot," or ghauth,  "help."
The saint s govern the universe , certain groups of three, seven, forty,
or three hundre d saints being entruste d with various duties in
maintaining th e world order (see Chapter 4). Like the prophets ,
whose sea l is Muhammad , the saints have their seal, the last and
culminating figur e in the hierarchy .
The degree s of sainthoo d as sketched by Tirmidh i are related to
the degre e of illuminatio n and gnosis reached by the person in
question—it i s not a "hierarch y of love." With him, the emphasi s
upon gnosis , mcfrifa, become s more explicit ; he thus prepares the
way for later theosophi c speculation .
But while Sahl and Tirmidh i wrote about saintshi p and gnosis,
cAmr al-Makk i (d. 909) was probably the first to compose a system-
atic treatis e on the degrees of love, intimacy , and proximity .
The undispute d master of the Sufis of Baghdad was AbuDl-Qasim
al-Junayd, wh o is considere d the pivot in the history of early Su-
fism.36 The representative s of divergen t mystical schools and modes
of though t could refer to him as their master, so that the initiatio n
chains of later Sufi orders almost invariabl y go back to him.
Like man y other mystics, Junayd came from Iran; born in Niha-
wand, he settled in Baghda d and studie d law accordin g to the Shafi-
ite rite. In Sufism he was educate d by his uncle Sari as-Saqati ;
36. A. J. Arberry , "Junaid, " Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1935, p. 499;
A. H. Abdel Kader, The Life, Personality  and Writings  of al-Junayd,  Gibb Memoria l
Series, n.s . 22 (London , 1962). See the review of Abdel Kader's book by Joseph van
Ess, Oriens  20 (1967). A fine analysi s is given in Zaehner , Hindu and Muslim  Mysti-
cism, pp.13 5 ff.

--- Page 81 ---
58 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
Muhasibi's psychologica l insight seems to have impresse d him, and
the influenc e of Kharraz o n his formatio n is apparentl y greater than
has been proved at the moment . One of his fellow Sufis, al-Haddad ,
is reporte d to have said: "If intellec t (caql} were a man, it would
have the form of Junayd" (N 80), a saying that alludes to the seri-
ousness, sobriety , and penetratin g mind of the master.
Junayd—faithful t o the Muhasib i tradition—see s in Sufism a way
of constan t purificatio n and mental struggle : "We did not take
Sufism fro m talk and words, but from hunger and renunciatio n of
the world and cutting off the things to which we were accustome d
and whic h we found agreeable " (Q 19). The mystica l life meant,
for him, the permanen t striving to return to one's origin, that
origin tha t was in God and from which everythin g proceeds , so that
eventually th e mystic should reach the state "in which he was be-
fore he was." That is the state of the primordia l covenan t (Sura
7:171), whe n God was alone and what is created in time was not
yet existent . Only then can man realize perfect tauhid; only then
can he witness that God is one from eternity to eternity .
The tremendou s majesty of God in His alonenes s and unity
permeates ever y thought of Junayd; he feels that majesty whose
will must be accepted in every moment of life, and before whom the
servant become s nothing through constan t obedience , worship , and
permanent recollectio n of His name, until he reaches the "annihila -
tion in the object mentioned, " when the recollectin g human is no
longer separate d from the object of his recollection , God. Unifica-
tion means , for Junayd, "the separatio n of the Eternal from that
which has been originate d in time by the Covenant " (H 281); and
it also means "to go out of the narrownes s of tempora l signs into
the wide fields of eternities " (L 29). Like other mystica l leaders,
Junayd spok e about the differen t stations and stages on the Path;
he praised poverty , faqr, which is "an ocean of affliction , yet its
affliction i s completel y glory" (L 174). Mystica l love means, to him,
"that the qualities of the Beloved replace the qualities of the lover"
(L 59); it is a transformatio n of the lover on the level of attributes .
A major aspect of Junayd's teaching is his emphasi s on the state
of sobriet y (sahw] as contraste d to intoxicatio n (sukr). Bayezid
Bistami preferre d mystica l intoxicatio n because it obliterate s the
human attribute s and annihilate s man completel y in the object of
adoration, takin g him out of himself. Junayd and his followers ,
however, considere d the "second sobriety " the highest and prefera-

--- Page 82 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 59
ble state: after the ecstatic intoxicatio n man become s once more
aware of himself in the "life in God," when all his attributes , trans-
formed an d spiritualized , are restored to him. Fand, "annihilation, "
is not the ultimate goal, but baqd, "remaining, " a new life in God.
Junayd's claim , like that of Bayezld, is absolute ; he concentrate d
every thought , every love, every inclination , every admiration ,
every fear , and every hope on God and asked Him to annihilat e
everything tha t might exist outside this perfect concentratio n (A
10:282).
Junayd kne w very well that mystica l experienc e and though t
cannot be rationalize d and that it is dangerou s to speak openly
about the deepest mysterie s of faith in the presenc e of the uniniti-
ated (particularl y since orthodo x circles viewed the activitie s of
the Sufis with growing suspicion) . It was for this reason that he had
rejected Hallaj , who was to become the model for all who are pun-
ished becaus e they speak openly about the mysterie s of love and
unity. Junayd , therefore , refined the art of speaking in ishdrdt,  sub-
tle allusio n to the truth—a trend, attribute d first to Kharraz , that
became characteristi c of later Sufi writings . His letters and short
treatises ar e written in a cryptic style; their languag e is so dense
that they are difficult to understan d for one not acquainte d with
his peculia r way of thinking and teaching . This languag e of ex-
quisite beaut y rather veils than unveils the true meaning .
One of Junayd's friends in Baghda d was Ruwaym (d. 915); in
fact, the Baghda d Sufis were divided in their preference s between
these two masters. Ansari admitted 150 years later that he "would
prefer one hair of Ruwaym to a hundred of Junayd" (N 95).
Ruwaym i s remembere d by later hagiographer s mainly because
he did not practice the same extraordinar y austeritie s as many of
his contemporarie s and did not overemphasiz e tawakkul,  absolute
trust in God. "He disguise d himself in the attitude of a rich
man" (N 95). Ibn Khaflf, the Shirazi Sufi leader, relates how Ru-
waym's littl e daughter , prettily dressed in red, ran into her father's
arms, and he caressed her and explaine d to his surprised visitor that
he liked to care for his family and would not leave everythin g to
tawakkul ( X 85). For him, tawakkul  meant trust in God's eternal
promise t o look after His creature s (L 52), but it did not mean to
turn completel y away from worldly concerns .
Two mor e figures of the Baghda d circle should be mentioned ,
both of them famous for their love. They are Abu 3l-Husayn an -

--- Page 83 ---
60 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
Nuri (d. 907) and Sumnun , whose sobrique t was al-Muhibb,  "the
lover" (d. after 900).
Nuri had been a disciple of Sari as-Saqat i and was, thus, a con-
frere of Junayd; after having spent some years in Raqqa in north-
ern Iraq, he had returne d to the capital. He is the greatest repre-
sentative o f that pure love that had been introduce d by Rabi ca, a
disinterested lov e for which God has not asked and for which He
will not recompens e the lover. That his love—a love that rejoices
in suffering—wa s not only theoretica l was proved when Ghulam
Khalil brough t charges against the Sufis of Baghda d in 885. Ac-
cused of heresy, and likely to be sentence d to capital punishment ,
Nuri offere d his life to save his companions ; the caliph, touched
by such magnanimity , investigate d the case, found the Sufis to be
good Muslims , and set them free. Brotherl y love was, for Nuri, the
perfect expressio n of truthfulnes s as well as of genuine spiritua l
poverty, whic h meant preferrin g others to himself .
Nuri was considere d a heretic (zindlq) by the orthodo x because
he spoke of being a lover (^dshiq) of God, a strong term that was
misinterpreted b y the theologian s (see B 389). His love was over-
whelming, an d in his enthusias m he tended to "tear the veils" (L
59) and therefor e expose himself to blame and danger. He was,
however, no t only the representativ e of a love that overflow s all
borders an d tempts man to seemingl y blameworth y acts; he also
composed a  number of theoretica l works that have only recently
come to light. Like Shaqiq, he speaks of the light of God, which is
the first thing to appear when God wants to guide a person on the
mystical pat h (W 348). His Maqamat  al-qulub  "The Station s of
the Hearts, " contains a fine analysis of the psychologica l stages and
their "seats " in the human heart. Nwyia (W 326) has drawn the
attention o f scholars to Nun's colorful imagery , which until recent-
ly was known only from his short musical poems and some frag-
ments of prose. But to truly appraise his power of expression , one
should rea d Nuri's elaborat e compariso n of the heart to a house in
which a king, Certitude , resides, assisted by two viziers, Fear and
Hope, and surrounde d by ten chiefs, which are the main duties of
a pious Muslim . Another descriptio n of the cleaning of this house
reminds u s immediately , in its consequences , of Jalaludd m Rumi's
famous verse s about the lover who is admitted to the abode of the
beloved onl y after he has become annihilated, fo r "there is no room
for two I's in this narrow house" (M 113056-63)—a n echo of a basic

--- Page 84 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 6l
mystical experienc e through the centuries . Nun's descriptio n of
the seven citadels, surrounde d by seven rampart s and a wall, as God
has built them in the heart, is somewha t reminiscen t of St. Theresa' s
Interior Castle,  though the Baghdad Sufi does not reach the psycho-
logical dept h of the great Carmelit e nun.
Nuri's definitio n of the heart as a garden prefigure s later Per-
sian garde n poems: the garden of the heart is either blessed or de-
stroyed by rain—rai n being, in the East, a symbol of divine activity
and, generally , of divine mercy. Nuri speaks of the two-fold rain,
one of grace and mercy and one of divine wrath and revenge ; the
first one is revealed by thunder s of majesty in the hearts of those
who repent , by the lightnin g of desire in the hearts of the ascetics,
by the showers of generosit y in the hearts of the lovers, and by the
breeze of appeasemen t in the hearts of the gnostics . But the thun-
derstorm o f revenge sends the thunder of rupture into the hearts
of the idolaters , the lightnin g of hatred into the hearts of the hypo-
crites, the rains of enmity into the hearts of the oppressors , and the
wind of the veiling screen into the hearts of those who transgres s
the law. Nuri was, as can be understoo d from these few details,
indeed a forerunne r of the later poets, who never tired of express-
ing their mystica l experience s in the imagery  of gardens, flowers,
rains., and fruits—thos e poets who would symboliz e the word coming
to them from the beloved by the life-bestowin g morning breeze, or
the adven t of the Prophe t by a merciful rain that quicken s the
parched heart s of mankind .
Nuri seem s not to have been a conformin g member of the Bagh-
dad Sufi circles. There are stories that recount Junayd' s criticizin g
him for exuberan t words and startlin g miracles . Indeed, his way
of educatin g his lower soul was quite peculiar : he was afraid of lions
and therefor e stayed in the lion-infeste d forests along the Tigris
to conque r his fear.37 Does he not remind us of the age-old mytho-
logical tale s in which the hero goes into the forest, the symbol of
his unconscious , in order to overcom e the animals , which represen t
his lower instincts ? Nuri's death, too, occurred in a strange way:
enraptured b y the recitatio n of a verse, he ran into a nearby reedbed
where the reeds had just been cut; the razor-shar p edges of the
stumps hur t his feet without his being aware of the pain; soon
afterward h e died from the wounds .
37. Ibn al-Jauzi , Talbls iblis (Cairo, 1921-22) , p. 381, dwells intensel y upon this
frequently tol d story.

--- Page 85 ---
62 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
Among th e friends who had been tried and imprisone d with
Nun was Sumnun the Lover, who called himsel f "the Liar": "He,
without fear , and completel y love, he withou t reason and complete -
ly heart, that moth of the candle of Beauty, that man confuse d by
the dawn of union"—tha t is how c Attar introduce d him in lovely
rhyming sentence s (T 2:82). He told touchin g stories about the
Lover: th e lamps in the mosqu e shattere d when Sumnu n began
preaching abou t disintereste d and selfless love, and birds killed
themselves whil e listenin g to his heart-rendin g sermons . Before
c Attar, Hujwir l had said that Sumnu n "held a special madhhab  in
love and considere d love the root and the foundatio n of the way
towards God " (H 398). Later, Jam! related that men and women
gave up their spirits during his preaching .
Sumnun considere d love superio r to gnosis (P 39)—a problem
much discusse d at that time among the Sufis. The solutio n finally
depends upo n the persona l attitude of each travele r on the mystica l
path. Sumnu n knew, like Dhu Dn-Nun an d all those who had ex-
perienced divin e love, that it is always connecte d with affliction .
When he was asked why, he replied: "In order that not every ordi-
nary perso n may claim love, for he will run away when he sees afflic-
tion" (T 2:85). Love is the true religion of the spiritua l elite, and
its subtlet y and depth cannot be conveye d by words. The meta-
phors tha t Sumnu n the Lover used to express the ineffabl e experi-
ence of this love, of which he was only a fragile vessel, are not taken
from the vocabular y of worldly love. Rather, they are perfectl y
chaste, lucid , almost immaterial :
I have separate d my heart from this world—
My heart an d Thou are not separate .
And whe n slumbe r closes my eyes,
I find Thee betwee n the eye and the lid.
(A 10:310 )
There is a direct line from the verses of Sumnu n to the sublim e
poems bein g written at the same time by the most famous mystic
of Baghda d and of the whole early period of Sufism, al-Hallaj .
AL-HALLAJ, MARTYR OF MYSTICAL LOVE
When Halla j was in prison,  he was asked: "What is love?" He an-
swered: "Yo u will see it today and tomorro w and the day after tomor-
row." And that day they cut off his hands and feet, and the next day they

--- Page 86 ---
The Martyrdom  of al-Halldj } from a manuscript  of Amir Khosrau's
Diwan, seventeenth-century  India.
The Walters  Art Gallery,  Baltimore

--- Page 87 ---
64 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
put him on the gallows , and the third day they gave his ashes to the
wind ... .
This story , told by cAttar (T 2:142), conveys in a nutshell the
secret of Hallaj's life, love, and death. With the intuitio n of a great
psychologist, c  Attar has condense d into these words the tragedy of
a man who deeply influence d the developmen t of Islamic mysticis m
and whos e name became, in the course of time, a symbol for both
suffering lov e and unitive experience , but also for a lover's greatest
sin: to divulge the secret of his love.
European scholar s have been attracte d by Hallaj's fate since his
name wa s first discovere d in Arabic sources . After the British
scholar Edwar d Pocock (d. 1691), it was the German protestan t
theologian F . A. D. Tholuck who drew attentio n to him whom he
calls "the Sufi most famous (inclytissimus)  by fame and fate" 38 who
"removed th e veil of pantheis m publicl y with incredibl e audacity. "
The quotatio n that Tholuck then gives is both wrongl y spelled
and wrongl y interprete d so that Hallaj's image was seriously dis-
torted in subsequen t times.
Tholuck regarde d Hallaj as a pantheist ; that became the opinion
of the nineteenth-centur y scholars,  and it was, and to some degree
still is, accepted by a number of theologians . Some have accused
Hallaj of blasphemy , while others considere d him a secret Chris-
tian. This latter view was taken up in the late nineteent h century
by Augus t Miiller and lingers on in the minds of some scholars .
Other orientalists , in the light of the sources at hand, tended to
regard him as a neuropath or as a pure monist. Alfred von Kremer
tried to locate the source of Hallaj's famous word ancfl-Haqq,  "I
am the Absolut e Truth," in Indian sources, and Max Horten drew
the compariso n betwee n this mystica l statemen t and the aham
brahmasmi o f the Upanishads , in which a number of oriental schol-
ars have also concurred . Max Schreine r and Duncan Black Mac-
donald regarde d Hallaj as a full-fledge d pantheist ; contrary to them,
Reynold A . Nicholso n stressed the strict monotheis m and the very
personal relatio n betwee n man and God in Hallaj's thought . Fi-
nally, Ada m Mez dwelt upon possible connection s between the great
Sufi and Christia n theology .
Now, thank s to the lifelong work of Louis Massignon , the en-
vironment an d influence s on Hallaj have been explore d so that his
38. Friedric h Augus t Deofidu s Tholuck , Ssufismus  sive theosophia  persarum
pantheistica (Berlin , 1821), p. 68.

--- Page 88 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 65
life and teaching s have become better known and better understoo d
in the West. 39 Massigno n has edited the difficult rhyming prose of
the Kitdb  at-tawdsln  and has collecte d Hallaj' s scattere d poems,
which, in marvelou s density, give utteranc e to the transcendenc e
of God and His immanenc e in the human heart. The mystery of
loving union i s celebrate d in verses free of any trace of the symbol-
ism of profane love. Massigno n devoted his whole life to the explo-
ration, of the spiritua l world of Hallaj, adding more and more
details, whic h he set forth in a monumenta l biograph y of the martyr-
mystic tha t first appeared in 1922—jus t one thousan d years after
Hallaj's execution . In fact, Hallaj is, as Hans Heinric h Schaede r
says in his review of Massignon' s book, the martyr of Islam par ex-
cellence becaus e he exemplifie d the deepest possibilitie s of personal
piety to be found in Islam; he demonstrate d the consequence s of
perfect lov e and the meaning of submissio n to the unity of the divine
beloved—not wit h the aim of gaining any sort of private sanctity but
in order to preach this mystery , to live in it and to die for it.
Who was this man who has been the object of both hatred and
love, the model of suffering , the arch-hereti c of orthodox writings ,
the ideal of enrapture d Sufis?
Ibn an-Nadim , relying upon certain inimica l sources, said of him
in the tenth century :
Al-Husayn ib n Mansur al-Halla j was a crafty man and a conjurer who
ventured int o the Sufi school of thought , affecting their ways of speech.
He laid claim to every science, but nevertheles s [his claims] were futile.
He even knew somethin g about the science of alchemy . He was ignorant ,
bold, obsequious , but courageou s in the presenc e of sultans, attemptin g
great thing s and ardently desiring a change of government . Among his
adherents h e claimed divinity , speaking of divine union . . . .40
This—together wit h the paragraph s that follow in Ibn an-Nadim' s
book—articulates th e conventiona l reading of Hallaj's personality .
Sober historica l facts, however , though sometime s not too clear,
reveal somethin g close to the followin g picture of his life:
39. Louis Massignon , La passion  d'Al-Hosayn  ibn Mansour  Al-Hallaj,  martyr
mystique d e I'Islam execute  a Bagdad le 26 Mars 922, 2 vols. (Paris, 1922); see Hans
Heinrich Schaeder' s review, Der Islam 15 (1926). Massignon , "Le diwan d'al-Hallaj ,
essai de reconstitution, " Journal  asiatique,  1931; new edition as separat e book (Paris,
1955). Massigno n and Paul Kraus, Akhbdr  al-Hallaj,  texte ancien relatif a la predica-
tion et au supplice  du mystique  musulman  al-Hosayn  b. Mansour  al-Hallaj,  3d ed.
(Paris, 1957) . See the Bibliograph y for other works by Massignon . Roger Arnaldez ,
Hallaj o u la religion  de la croix (Paris, 1964).
40. The Fihrist  of al-Nadim,  ed. and trans. Bayard Dodge, 2 vols. (New York, 1970),
1:474.

--- Page 89 ---
66 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
Husayn ib n Mansu r al-Hallaj , born in the provinc e of Fars in
858, grew up in Wasit and Tustar, where cotton was cultivate d and
where cotto n carders (that is the meanin g of halldj] like his father
could pursu e their occupation . The young man attache d himself to
Sahl at-Tustar i and accompanie d him to Basra. Later he became a
disciple o f cAmr al-Makk i in Baghda d and also of Junayd. He be-
came estrange d from cAmr whe n he married another mystic's daugh-
ter. She remaine d his only wife, and much informatio n about Hal-
laj's later life is given on the authorit y of their son Hamd. After a
short while , Hallaj's father-in-la w began to regard him as a "cun-
ning sorcere r and miserabl e infidel. " In connectio n with his first
pilgrimage, Husay n stayed in Mecca for a year, undergoin g terrible
hardships i n asceticism . After his return to Baghdad , Junayd fore-
told—according t o the legends—a n evil end for his former disciple .
At this point the tradition contain s the followin g anecdote :
When he knocked at Junayd's door, the master asked: "Who is there?"
and he answered : "ancfl-Haqq,  I am the Absolut e [or Creative ] Truth
[or the True Reality]. "
This sentenc e has become the most famous of all Sufi claims. In
fact, it appears in a chapter of Hallaj's Kitdb at-tawdsln  and was
probably take n from this source very early. In this chapter Hallaj
discusses hi s own claim togethe r with that of Pharaoh and Satan,
Pharaoh havin g asserted , accordin g to the Koran, "I am your highest
Lord" (Sur a 79:24) and Satan, "I am better than Adam" (Sura
7:12). Hallaj , then, asserts his own claim, "I am the Absolut e
Truth." Thi s passage led later mystics into deep speculation s about
the two differen t "I's," that of Pharaoh and that of the loving mys-
tic; the solution is given in the divine revelatio n that "Pharao h saw
only himsel f and lost Me, and Husayn saw only Me and lost himself"
(N 444), so that the "I" of the Egyptia n ruler was an expressio n of
infidelity bu t that of Hallaj expresse d divine grace (M 2:2522) .
Whatever th e reason for the statemen t ancfl-Haqq  may have been,
Junayd uttere d his verdict against his former disciple , accusing him
of propagatin g an unsoun d religiou s claim. The antagonis m of the
other mystic s of the Baghda d school, especiall y of cAmr al-Makk i
and his group, mounted . Hallaj left the capital. For five years he
traveled, ultimatel y reachin g Khurasan , where he discusse d reli-
gious problem s with the people; it was there, his son thinks, that he
was surname d halldj al-asrdr,  "the cotton carder of the innermos t

--- Page 90 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 67
hearts," sinc e he knew all things hidden in the human heart and
soul.
During a second pilgrimag e to Mecca, 400 disciples accompanie d
him, and eventually , in 905, Hallaj took a boat to India. His ene-
mies ascribe d this journey to his desire to learn magic, specifically ,
the rope trick. But he told his family that his aim was to call the
heathen t o God. From Gujera t he wandere d throug h Sind, the
lower Indu s valley, which had been a part of the Muslim Empire
since 711. The seeds he sowed there grew in later centurie s in the
mystical poetr y of this province . From Sind, Hallaj traveled to the
northern border s of India, then to Khurasan , to Turkestan , and
eventually t o Turfan—Massigno n has suggeste d that he may have
gone with the caravan s that brought brocad e from his home town of
Tustar to the East and returne d with Chinese paper to the Islamic
countries. Som e sources say that his words were written down on
precious pape r decorate d in the style of the Manichaea n manu-
scripts fro m Centra l Asia. In the eyes of the Baghda d governmen t
these external s drew suspicio n upon him. An even greater cause for
suspicion wa s his suppose d relation s with the Carmathians , who
ruled not only Bahrain but also northern Sind and Multan—place s
that the mystic had just visited. Did he not, after all, receive letters
from distan t Eastern lands in which he was addressed by strange
names?
The Akhbdr  al-Halldj,  a collection of anecdote s about Hallaj,
gives a vivid impressio n of his life in Baghda d before and especiall y
after his return from this last long journey . He is describe d preach-
ing and calling people to God, in intense love and excessiv e asceti-
cism. But in spite of his constan t preoccupatio n with prayer and
ascetic practices , Hallaj was sure that he had not completel y fulfilled
his duties toward God. In his ascetic mood he would prefer to feed
the black dog at his side, the image of his lower nature, instead of
taking foo d himself . At the same time he claimed miraculou s pow-
ers; in Mecca he produce d sweetmea t from Yemen , and he sent
down heavenl y food in the middle of the desert.
One can understan d how his behavio r encourage d oppositio n on
the part of both politica l and religiou s circles. Because of that Hal-
laj performe d the pilgrimag e once more, this time staying for two
years in the holy city of Mecca. Then he bought a house in Baghdad ,
but soon Muhamma d ibn DaDud, the son of the founder of the Za-

--- Page 91 ---
68 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
hirite schoo l of law, denounce d him, inciting other scholars to join
in attackin g the man who claimed to have reached real union with
his divine beloved, an idea that the representative s of platonic love
could not accept.
Aside from the subtle problem s of mystical love, political and so-
cial problem s were at stake. Hallaj was a friend of the chamberlai n
Nasr al-Qushuri , who favored better administratio n and juster taxa-
tion, dangerou s ideas in a time when the caliph was almost power-
less and the viziers, though all-powerfu l for a short period, changed
frequently. Th e Shia groups wh o supporte d the vizier Ibn al-Fura t
considered Halla j as dangerou s as did the Sunni orthodox wing sur-
rounding th e "pious vizier" CA1I ibn clsa. All of them were afraid
that the effect on the people of spiritual revival might have reper-
cussions o n the social organizatio n and even on the political struc-
ture. The idea of convertin g the hearts of all Muslims and teachin g
them the secret of personal sanctificatio n and not just of blind ac-
ceptance woul d certainl y have been dangerou s for a society whose
religious an d politica l leaders lived in a state of stagnatio n with
neither th e strength nor the intentio n to revitaliz e the Muslim
community.
At the end of 912 Hallaj was apprehende d while travelin g near
Sus; for three days he was set in a pillory, then imprisoned . Both the
caliph's mothe r and the chamberlai n Nasr—wh o called him "a
righteous man"—trie d to make his imprisonmen t as comfortabl e as
possible; bu t his situation grew worse during the financia l crisis of
919, when th e vizier Hamid tried by every means to have him exe-
cuted. Searchin g the houses of his disciples , the police found frag-
ments of correspondenc e in cryptic letters, partly decorate d with
picturesque forms , probably calligraphi c signs representin g the
name of CA1I and some of the divine names. But years passed before
the vizier could force the highest judge of Iraq to sign Hallaj' s death
sentence. O n 26 March 922 he was put to death.
The story goes that Hallaj went dancing in his fetters to the place
of execution , reciting a quatrain about mystical intoxication ; then
he asked his friend Shibli to lend him his prayer mat and performe d
a prayer during which he once more touched the mystery of the in-
effable unit y and separatio n of man and God. When people began
to throw stones at him, Shibli—s o the legend has it—threw a rose,
and Halla j sighed. Asked the reason for his sigh, he answered :
"They do not know what they do, but he should have known it."

--- Page 92 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 69
And the saying that "the rose, thrown by the friend, hurts more than
any stone " has become a Turkish proverb .
Hallaj's las t words were: "hash al-wdjid ifrdd al-wdhid  lahu—it  is
enough fo r the lover ['who has found in ecstasy' ] that he should
make the One single"—i.e. , that his existenc e should be cleared away
from the path of love (H 311). That is genuine tauhid,  fully interi-
orized, an d paid for with the lover's blood.
Hallaj's hand s and feet were cut off, and he was put on the cross
or, more probably , on the gallows , then decapitated ; his body was
burned an d the ashes thrown in the Tigris. This was the death for
which his whole life had been a preparation . He had often urged the
people of Baghda d to kill him so that he might be united with God
and they might be recompense d for defendin g their simple and
sincere faith . One of his most touchin g hymns begins with the
words:
Uqtuluni yd  thiqdtl—inna  fi qatll haydtl.
Kill me, o my trustworth y friends , for in my being killed
is my life-
words tha t have been repeate d by mystics throughou t the ages as a
basis for their meditations .
Hallaj's comprehensiv e work—o f which the Fihrist gives a list—is
preserved onl y in fragments . Mentio n has already been made of his
Kitdb at-tawdsm,  probabl y written during his imprisonment. 41 It
contains eigh t chapters , each of them called  tdsin, after the myste-
rious letter s at the beginnin g of Sura 27, which are said to indicat e
divine majest y and power. This little book deals with problem s of
divine unit y and with prophetology . It contain s a discussio n be-
tween Go d and Satan , in which the latter refuses to obey the divine
order to prostrat e himself before Adam and , true muwahhid  (con-
fessor of divine unity) that he is, is caught in the dilemm a betwee n
God's eterna l will that nobody should worshi p any being save Him
and His explici t order to fall down before a created being. This
situation ha s sometime s served to explain Hallaj' s own hopeles s di-
lemma. Hallaj' s satanolog y inspire d a number of later mystics to
develop thes e ideas (see Chapte r 4).
Portions o f the Kitdb at-tawdsin  are beautifu l hymns in honor of
the Prophet . Among the tradition s that he personall y affirmed , Hal-
41. Husay n ibn Mansur al-Hallaj , Kitdb at-tawdsin,  texte arabe . . . avec la version
persane d'al-Baqll,  ed. and trans. Louis Massigno n (Paris, 1913).

--- Page 93 ---
7O / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
laj include d the saying that "God has not created anythin g he loves
more tha n he loves Muhamma d and his family" (B 639). If there is
any doub t as to whethe r Hallaj was a faithful Muslim , one need
only read his descriptio n of Muhamma d in the "Tasm as-siraj " of
the Kitdb  at-tawasm.  These short, rhymin g sentence s achieve new
heights in the veneratio n of the Prophet :
All the lights of the Prophet s proceede d from his light; he was before all,
his name the first in the book of Fate; he was known before all things, all
being, and will endure after the end of all. By his guidanc e have all eyes
attained t o sight... . All knowledg e is merely a drop, all wisdom merely
a handful from his stream, all time merely an hour from his life ....
In anothe r chapter , Hallaj describe s the fate of the moth that ap-
proaches th e flame and eventuall y gets burned in it, thus realizin g
the Realit y of Realities . He does not want the light or the heat but
casts himsel f into the flame, never to return and never to give any
information abou t the Reality , for he has reached perfection . Who-
ever has read Persian poetry knows that the poets choose this story
of the moth and the candle as one of their favorite allegorie s to ex-
press the fate of the true lover (SD 311; an almost word-for-wor d
Persian poetica l paraphras e is found in cAttar's Mantiq  at-tayr,
when the poet speaks of the seventh and last valley of the mystica l
journey [M T 258]). Throug h the medium of Persian poetry the
same symbo l reached Europe . Goethe' s famous poem "Selig e Sehn-
sucht," in his West-Ostlicher  Divan, reflects this very myster y of
dying in love and reachin g a new, higher life in union. The Goe-
thean Stirb  und werde, "die and become, " translate s very well the
Prophetic traditio n "die before ye die" (in order to gain new life),
which forme d one of the cornerstone s of Sufism and, of course, of
Hallaj's theories. 42
Hallaj's poetr y is a very tender and intense expressio n of mystica l
yearning. It s languag e is chaste; the favorit e symbol s are the wine
cup, the crescent , the goblet of intoxicatin g mystica l joy, the virgin,
the soul bird, and similar images. He sometime s uses cabalisti c word
plays and relies on the secret meaning of the letters of the alphabet ;
alchemistic expression s are also found at times. All of his verses are
weighted wit h deep theologica l and mystica l meanin g and filled
with enigmas , but so great is their beauty that they can be enjoyed
even by those who do not care for deep religiou s interpretatio n but
42. Al-Hallaj , "Tasm al-fahm, " Kitdb at-tawasin,  pp. i6ff. Hans Heinric h Schaede r
has studie d the symbolis m of the moth and the candle in his essay "Die persisch e
Vorlage von  Goethes Seliger Sehnsucht, " in Festschrift  E. Spranger  (Berlin, 1942).

--- Page 94 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 71
do enjoy Arabic poetry at its best—an extremel y refined art with
many overtone s that evoke strange and fascinatin g echoes in the
reader (se e P 904). One can understan d from his poems what Hal-
laj meant when he declared that God is visible in every trace of His
creation, an d althoug h the commo n folk, the blind and dumb,
animal-like creatures , do not recogniz e Him, the mystic drinks not a
single dro p of water without discoverin g His vision in the cup. God
is He "who flows between the pericardiu m and the heart, just as the
tears flow from the eyelids. " Some of Hallaj's great hymns reveal
abysses of loneliness , like his threnod y for all things on earth that
are left blind and hopeles s because the witness has gone and left
them alone .
A small part of Hallaj's theology can be reconstructe d from the
scattered fragment s of his commentar y on the Koran preserve d in
the Tafstr  of Sulami  (d. 1021),  one of the leading  authorities  on the
mystical theolog y of his time. The Riwdydt— collected b y Ruzbiha n
Baqli in the late twelfth century—allo w some insight into the work-
ing of Hallaj's mind. They consist of tradition s that are not very dif-
ferent from , and are often verbally congruen t with, the generall y
accepted hadlth;  yet they are introduce d not by a chain of human
transmitters, a s is the rule in hadlth transmission , but by a chain
going bac k to cosmic and supernatura l powers, to stars and sun, to
angels and spirits. That is the way Hallaj authenticate d these tradi-
tions for himself. This personal acceptanc e and realizatio n of the
religious trut h was, perhaps, one of his most original contribution s
to Muslim spiritua l life; it even led him to the doctrine of the isqat
al-farffid, i.e. , that certai n religiou s dutie s can be exchange d for
other acts that are more useful at the moment . Instead of performin g
the pilgrimage , he advised people to invite orphans and to feed and
dress them and make them happy for the day of the Great Feast.
Such ideas , of course, were not acceptabl e to the legalists .
Some of Hallaj's letters have been preserved , as have a few of his
prayers an d a small number of isolated sayings , which often have a
dialectical for m that seems to be typical of the mystica l mind: "Do
not let yourself be deceived by God, nor cut off your hope from
Him; do not wish His love, and do not resign from loving Him." By
such paradoxe s the ineffabl e mystery of the love relation betwee n
man and God is disclosed . And this love relation is, in fact, the
central them e of Hallaj's prayers an d sermons . Love, for Hallaj, was
certainly no t sheer obedience : "Love is that you remain standing in

--- Page 95 ---
72 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
front of your beloved, when you are deprived of your qualities and
when the qualificatio n comes from His qualification. " This love is
realized throug h suffering—ma n can be united with the divine will
by acceptin g sufferin g and even longing for it: "Sufferin g is He
Himself, wherea s happines s comes from Him." That is one of the
decisive saying s of Hallaj. But this suffering is not a means of de-
humanizing ma n and bringin g him back into his first state, "as he
was befor e he was," as was held by the follower s of Junayd. Hallaj
did not advocat e destructio n for the sake of destruction ; he saw in
suffering a  positive value by means of which man might understan d
that cishq, "love, " is the essence of the essence of God and the mys-
tery of creation. The word cishq, with its connotatio n of "passionate ,
overflowing love, " came to mean, for him, dynamic divine love; but
this term was considere d dangerous , if not illicit, even by moderat e
Sufis. In Hallaj's theory, the compensatio n for having offered God
unconditional lov e was the beatific vision, without an interven -
ing "I."
The sentenc e ancfl-Haqq,  "I am the Absolute  Truth," or, as it was
translated later , "I am God," led many mystics to believe that Hal-
laj was a pantheist , consciou s of the unity of being. Hallaj's theory,
however, maintain s the absolute transcendenc e of God beyond the
dimensions o f created things, his qidam, the preeternit y that sepa-
rates Him forever from the hadath, "what is created in time." How-
ever, in rare moment s of ecstasy the uncreate d spirit may be united
with the created human spirit, and the mystic then become s the liv-
ing persona l witness of God and may declare anffl-Haqq.  We must
remember that , accordin g to Hallaj, God's nature contain s human
nature withi n it. This human nature was reflected in the creation of
Adam, an d Adam became huwa huwa, "exactly He." This theory
has led many critics to the assumptio n that the Christia n dogma of
the incarnatio n influence d Hallaj, an assumptio n seemingl y sup-
ported by his use of the Christia n terms Idhut, "divine nature," and
nasut, "huma n nature." But his theories are too complicate d to be
reducible t o this or that influence . Indeed, they so intimatel y reflect
the uniquenes s of Hallaj's thought that it is useless to trace each one
back to its source.
Hallaj wa s willing to suffer for himself and for others. The mys-
tery of his death is aptly describe d in fimile Dermenghem' s words
about the true Musli m saint:

--- Page 96 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 73
The saint is he who takes upon him the sins and the pain of the world;
the unjust death is, for him, one of his means of accomplishments . He is
the "great Help" and the consolatio n of the people. He is a living accu-
sation for the world: his existenc e insults the tyrants, his death makes
tremble hi s executioners , his canonisatio n is a victory of faith, of love,
and of hope. 43
This is the spirit in which Husayn ibn Mansu r al-Halla j went to the
gallows. Sinc e he was put to death by the government—o r the estab-
lishment—his influenc e became even stronge r after his executio n
than it had been during his lifetime. 44 About the year 1000 the Syri-
an poet Macarri wrot e that in his day people still stood on the
banks of the Tigris awaitin g Hallaj's return.
Persian poetica l tradition has praised Hallaj; the founder s of the
mystical fraternitie s as well as the theoretician s of Sufism frequentl y
referred t o him—sometime s in terms of pity, sometime s in admira -
tion, and sometime s rejectin g him or declarin g him to be merely a
beginner o n the mystica l Path. The fact that he proclaime d the se-
cret of love openly made him appear to more sober mystics as one
who had not reached his goal: for them he resemble d the kettle that
sings as long as the water is not yet boiling; when the water boils and
evaporates, th e kettle become s silent. Other mystics have accused
him of believin g that the human and divine natures can be united,
resulting i n the heretica l doctrine of hulul, "incarnation. " Even
Hujwiri, i n a book written in the mid-elevent h century—unfortu -
nately no longer extant—i n spite of all his admiratio n for Hallaj, felt
obliged to declare him "not firmly settled. "
A great number of Sufi poets, however , have shown their predilec -
43. £mile Dermenghem , Le culte des saints dans I'Islam maghrebin  (Paris, 1954),
P- 94-
44. Louis Massignon , "La survie d'al-Hallaj, " Bulletin  d'etudes  arabes Damas 11
(1945-46); Massignon , "La legend e de Hallac e Mansu r en pays turcs," Revue des
etudes islamiques,  1941-46; Massignon , "L'oeuvr e Hallagienn e d'Attar, " Revue des
etudes islamiques,  1941-46; Massignon , "Qissat Husayn al-Hallaj, " Donum  Natalicum
H. S. Nyberg, ed. E. Gren et al. (Uppsala , 1954). Annemari e Schimmel , ed. and trans.,
Al-Halladsch, Martyrer  der Gottesliebe  (Cologne , 1969), an antholog y compile d from
Hallaj's writing s and from poetry and prose by Muslim author s from differen t coun-
tries; Schimmel , "The Martyr-Mysti c Hallaj in Sindhi Folk-Poetry, " Numen  9
(1962): 3; Abdulghafu r Rawan Farhadi , "Le majlis de al-Hallaj , de Shams- i Tabrezi et
du Moila de Roum, " Revue des etudes islamiques,  1954, a Persian passio n play,
ta'-ziya; Sali h Zeki Aktay, Hallac-T.  Mansur (Istanbul , 1942), a Turkish tragedy ; M.
Salih Bhatti , Mansur Halldj (Hyderabad , Sind, 1952); Salah cAbdu3s-Sabur, Ma^sat  al-
Halldj (Beirut , 1964), trans. K. J. Semaan as Murder in Baghdad  (Leiden , 1972). Almost
every collectio n of modern Arabic poetry contain s some poems in honor of al-Hallaj ,
for example , the works of Adonis and al-Bayatl .

--- Page 97 ---
74 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
tion for Hallaj, and the Persian traditio n largely follows the exam-
ple set by Ibn Khaflf of Shiraz, who had visited him in prison and
defended him , even to the extent of calling him an cdlim rabbdni,
"a divinel y inspired master. " Some of Hallaj's disciple s sought
shelter in Iran during the critical years of Hallaj's persecution , and
there they secretly transmitte d his ideas. We owe the preservatio n
of the most importan t Hallaj ian texts to Ruzbiha n Baqli, the mystic
of Shiraz who stands in the Ibn Khaflf tradition ; Ruzbihan' s com-
mentaries o n the Kitdb at-tawasln  and on many other sayings of the
master are the most valuable source for our understandin g of large
parts of Hallaj's theology.  Another leading representativ e of the
Hallaj ian tradition in Iran—thoug h from a different point of view-
is Fariduddi n cAttar, the poet (d. 1220 in Nishapur) . He had ac-
cepted Halla j as his spiritua l guide in a vision, and Hallaj's name
recurs ofte n in c Attar's lyrical and epic poetry. cAttar's descriptio n
of Hallaj' s suffering , found in his hagiographica l work Tadhkirat
al-auliya1, ha s deeply influence d almost all later mystics who wrote
about the martyr-mysti c in the Persian-speakin g lands—Turkey ,
Iran, Centra l Asia, and India. The details of his account of Hallaj's
execution ar e repeated in nearly every subsequen t book; they have
been poeticall y elaborate d in many languages—Persian , Turkish ,
Urdu, Sindhi , Panjabi, and Pashto—bu t in substanc e they remaine d
unchanged.
The work of the greatest of the mystica l poets to write in Persian ,
Jalaluddm Rumi , contains numerou s allusion s to the fate of Man-
sur, "the victorious, " as Hallaj is often called after his father; some
of his utterance s and verses have been embellishe d by Rumi in an
entirely ingeniou s way. Turkish Sufi tradition also shows a strong
penchant fo r Mansur. In the Bektash i order, his name is connecte d
with the central place of initiation , which is called ddr-e Mansur,
"the gallow s of Mansur" ; Bektash i poets from the fourteent h cen-
tury onwar d have often imitated the "unitive cry," anafl-Haqq,  and
have hear d echoes of these words everywhere . And one ought not
fail to mention Nesiml , the Hurufi poet (execute d in 1417) who
considered himsel f "a new Mansur " and reenacte d in his own life
the passio n and death of Hallaj.
Most recentl y Turkish literatur e has borne witness to the abiding
inspiration o f Hallaj with the appearanc e of a play called Mansur-e
Hallaj; it s author tries to establis h his hero as an heir to Zoro-

--- Page 98 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 75
astrian ideas . The date of the play is especiall y significant : it was
written in 1940, at a time when Islamic religiou s instructio n was
banned fro m Turkis h schools and laicism had reached its apex.
In Iran, the name of the martyr-mysti c has become a common -
place in the verses of almost all poets; they allude to the gallows and
the sad fate of the lover, sometime s even likening the tresses of their
beloved to the rope of Mansur' s gallows. They see the red rose on its
bough as a symbol of Hallaj on the gallows tree, and they find the
word anffl-Haqq  manifes t in the heart of every atom and every drop
of water. Even among the tcfziyas, the plays written in commemora -
tion of Husayn ibn c All's martyrdo m at Kerbela on the tenth of
Muharram 680 , Enrico Cerulli has discovere d one piece that deals
with the fate of Hallaj, who is here in strange juxtapositio n with
Maulana Rum I and his mystica l precepto r and beloved Shams- i
Tabriz (th e combinatio n of Hallaj and Shams is also known from
Indo-Muslim fol k poetry) . The tragic figure of Mansur occurs in
modern Persia n drama, too.
The poet s in Iran and Afghanista n were outdone in their de-
votion to the Hallajia n traditio n by the Indian poets writing in
Persian wh o made use of the figure of Hallaj from the eleventh cen-
tury on. The images and forms they used are almost identical with
those foun d in classica l Persian poetry. An even stronger predilec -
tion for Mansur is to be found in the mystica l folk songs compose d
in the vernacular s of Muslim India and adjacen t areas. The Pathans
knew the name of the martyr of love (who is even mentione d in their
proverbs), a s did the Panjabis . His name occurs in most of the mysti-
cal Panjab i songs as the representativ e of love, contraste d with the
dry asceticis m of the theologian s and the bookishnes s of the mol-
lahs. Halla j is mentione d just as frequentl y in Sindhi poetry: one
can scarcel y find any book of mystical verses in Sindhi or its north-
ern dialect , Siraiki, that does not contain allusion s to him or his
fate. He is the great lover; he plays "the drum of unity" (a modern
Turkish poet , Asaf Halet Qelebi, has also written a fine poem on
the "drum of Mansur") ; his goblet is filled with the primordia l wine
of unity; and he is one of those who must suffer because of their
overflowing passio n and because God loves them too much. He is
the model for every loving soul who will gladly suffer and die for the
sake of his love; but he is also in constan t danger because it is not
permitted t o proclaim the word of love openly—

--- Page 99 ---
76 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
The secre t that is hidden in the breast is not a sermon;
you canno t utter it in the pulpit, but on the gallows.
That is—sinc e the days of Sana3!—one of the central ideas in Persian
and Indo-Musli m poetry, which has found its finest expressio n in
the verse just quoted by Ghalib (d. 1869). Or is the poet, perhaps,
declaring tha t death is the only legitimat e way to express the secret
of loving union? And does he aver that the ultimat e experienc e is
communicable throug h the silent language of martyrdom , for in the
martyr (shahtd)  God has His true witness (shdhid)?
There is nothing more touchin g than to hear the plaintiv e Sindhi
folk songs in a remote corner of the Indus valley through which the
great mysti c had wandere d in order to call the people to God a
thousand year s ago:
When you want to know the way of love,
ask those who are like Mansur .
In our day, there is renewed interes t throughou t the Islamic
world in the figure of Hallaj, thanks, in large part, to Massignon' s
comprehensive work . Muhamma d Iqbal (d. 1938), who in his youth
described th e great mystic as a pantheist—a s he had seen him
through hundred s of Persian , Urdu, and Panjab i poems—late r
recognized Hallaj' s strong persona l religious commitmen t and saw
in him one of the few who had attained to an experienc e of the
divine highe r than that of ordinary people. He recognize d that
Hallaj had called the slumberin g Muslim s to a personal realizatio n
of the truth, thus coming into conflict with the religious authoritie s
who were afraid of any ardent witness for the living God. In the
scene in Jupiter-Heave n in the Jdwidndme  that depicts his spiritual
journey throug h the spheres, Iqbal has even treated Hallaj as a sort
of medieva l forerunne r of himself and has emphasize d his dynamic
concept o f love and faith as an ideal for every free Muslim .
Even in the Arab lands, in which Hallaj was less renowne d than
in those areas influence d by the Persian mystica l tradition , he has
gained fam e recently : the philosophe r cAbduDr-Rahman Badaw l has
likened Mansur' s experienc e to that of Kierkegaard , seeing in him
a true existentialist . Poets like Adonis in Lebano n and cAbduDl
Wahhab al-Bayat i in Iraq have written sensitivel y of the secret of
his personality ; and a young socialis t writer from Egypt, Salah
cAbduVSabur, ha s compose d a Tragedy of Hallaj. Its form shows

--- Page 100 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 77
influences o f Eliot's dramati c technique . The interestin g aspect of
the work is the intensity with which the author highlight s the social
side of Hallaj's message .
Hallaj's nam e has found its way into the remotes t corners of the
Islamic world . It can be discovere d in the folklore of East Bengal
and the Malaya n archipelago ; it has been used by some Sufi fraterni-
ties in their celebrations , and a Tunisian order has an entire litany
in honor of the martyr-mystic . Mansur's suffering through "gallow s
and rope" has become a symbol for the modern progressiv e writers
in India and Pakista n who underwen t imprisonmen t and torture
for their ideals like "the victorious " of old.
In Salah eAbduYSabur's traged y the member s of the chorus sing
about the words of Hallaj:
—And we will go, to scatter in the plough furrows of the
peasants wha t we have stored up from his words ....
—And we will preserve them among the merchants '
goods.
—And we will give them to the wind that wanders o'er
the waves .
—And we will hide them in the mouths of singing camel-
drivers wh o traverse the desert.
—And we will note them down on papers, to be kept in
the folds of the frock.
—And we will make them into verses and poems.
All of them:
Tell me—wha t would become of his words,
if he were not martyred ?
THE PERIOD OF CONSOLIDATION: FROM SHIBLI TO GHAZZALI
Hallaj represent s the culminatin g point of early Sufism;
but the mystica l impetus of the early Baghdad school continue d in
a number of Sufis who lived shortly after him and represented ,
again, differen t aspects of Sufism. Hallaj's most faithful friend, Ibn
cAta3—with who m he had exchange d some beautifu l poetical let-
ters—was kille d in connectio n with Hallaj's executio n and, thus,
paid for his friendshi p with his life. Another friend, Abu Bakr ash-
Shibll, survive d Hallaj by twenty-thre e years.
Shibll had been a high governmenta l official before his conver-

--- Page 101 ---
78 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
sion to the mystica l life. When he died in 945 at the age of eighty-
six, he left behind a considerabl e number of sayings and paradoxe s
upon whic h followin g generation s often pondered . His strange be-
havior resulte d from time to time in his confinemen t in an asylum;
thus he was spared, accordin g to his own statement , the fate of Hal-
la], for he tried to express some of Hallaj's lofty ideas in more com-
prehensible language . In one poem he compare s himself to a frog:
Now praise d be God, that like a frog am I
Whose sustenanc e the watery deeps supply.
It opens its mouth, and straightwa y it is filled.
It holds its peace, and must in sorrow die.
ShiblFs contemporarie s and later Sufis are divided in their feel-
ings abou t him—Junay d called him "the crown of these people"
(N 180), whereas others, acknowledgin g his strong mystica l "state,"
yet held that he was not a proper interprete r of tauhld (N 145). The
sayings an d short, delicatel y expresse d verses attribute d to him 45
show his overwhelmin g feeling of God's unity and of the love that
removes fro m the heart all but the beloved or consume s all but the
will of the beloved (Q 190). "To love Him for His acts of grace
means to be a polytheist " (A 10:369) , for, in the tradition of Rabi ca,
God has to be the only goal for the lover who not only loves Him
with his heart but all of whose limbs "are hearts pointing to Thee"
(L 91). Similarly , "the best recollectio n is to forget recollectio n in
vision" (L  220).  God,  the ever  living  and everlasting,  should  be the
only objec t of love: "Shibli saw somebod y weeping because his be-
loved had died and blamed him: 'O fool, why do you love someone
who can die?' " (T 2:172). God's face, i.e., His essence, is the proof
for the lover on the day "when proofs are required " (L 209).
Like Nuri , Shibli sometime s used the kind of imagery that be-
came commonplac e in later Persian poetry. Thus he describe s the
"gnostics," thos e who know God by intuitiv e knowledg e and are,
therefore, th e nearest perfect of men:
They are comparabl e to springtime : thunder clashes and the clouds
pour rain, the lightnin g flashes and the wind blows, the buds open and
the birds sing—suc h is the state of the gnostic: his eye weeps, his mouth
smiles, his heart burns, he gives away his head, he mention s the name of
the Belove d and walks around His door. (T 2:177)
Such a descriptio n could have come from any of the later Persian
45. Abu Bakr Shibli, Diwan,  ed. Kamil M. ash-Shayb i (Cairo, 1967).

--- Page 102 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 79
mystics, wh o so often compare d their conditio n to clouds and light-
ning; they knew that the weeping of the cloud is indispensabl e for
the growt h of a flower out of a heart tha t should be like soil.
When mentionin g Muhammad' s name in the call to prayer,
Shibll is reported to have said: "If Thou hadst not ordered it, I
would no t mention another name besides Thee" (Q 17). He there-
fore regarde d as infidel and polytheis t anyone who might think of
the angel s Michael and Gabriel—for , accordin g to the Propheti c
tradition, i n the moment of closest proximit y there is no room even
for Gabriel , who is pure spirit; lover and beloved are alone, without
separation (6413) .
Ruzbihan Baql i preserve d many of Shibli's paradoxes , which
foreshadow trend s that became explicit in later mysticism . When he
told his disciples to go away and to know that whereve r they were
they were under his protectio n and he would be with them, he
points to the power of himma,  that "high spiritua l ambition, " or
"power," tha t is strong enough to keep safe those who believe in the
master. Being united in perfect tauhld with God, he can protect his
disciples whereve r they may wander abou t (B 322), since he himself
works and
 walks through God. The claim of the sheikh to possess
this strong himma is reflected in many legends about saints of later
times.
Another stor y told about Shibll is typical of the so-calle d mund-
qara, "quarrel, " of saints: He threw one of his fellow mystics into
the Tigris , saying, "If he is sincere, he will be saved, like Moses;
if not, he will be drowned , like Pharaoh. " A few days later he was
challenged b y that very person to take live charcoal s from an oven
without bein g hurt (B 494). It seems that this kind of contest was
not uncommo n among the early Sufis; later sheikhs used to settle
questions o f priority in a similar way.
Baqli explain s Shibli's exclamatio n that "fire of Hell will not
touch me , and I can easily extinguis h it," when he says, faithfull y
interpreting th e genuine mystica l experience , that "in the world
those who have been drawn close to God are burnt by the fire
of pre-eterna l love so that it is for them that God ordered the fire
to be 'cool and pleasant ' [Sura 21:69], as He did for Abraham "
(B 460). In another saying, Shibll claimed that hellfire could not
burn even a single hair on his body. Baql i sees here a manifestatio n
of what he calls iltibds, the envelopmen t of the human being in the
light of preeternity : the divine uncreate d light is incomparabl y

--- Page 103 ---
8o / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
stronger than the created fire of Hell. For, according to a hadlth of
which the
 Sufis were particularl y fond, Hell addresse s the true
believer wit h the words: "Thy light has extinguishe d my flames"
(B 452). The mystic who has been surrounde d by the primordia l
and everlastin g divine light is no longer subject to the change of
mystical states , to death, Paradise , and Hell. Such a person may
leave the early station of renunciatio n and abstinenc e and become
a perfect lover; by love he become s "like a lion in the forest of
affliction" ( B 154).
Shibli's darin g paradoxe s find a counterpar t in the less often
quoted bu t extremel y interestin g sayings of his contemporar y Abu
Bakr al-Wasitl , who came from Farghana , settled for a while in
Baghdad, an d then returned to Khurasan . He too belonge d to the
group of Junayd and Nuri, but his sayings bear the stamp of a very
independent personality . "He would have needed a trifle of mercy"
(N 74), says Ansari, who praises him as the "leader of tauhld" and
"the maste r
 of the East in the science of subtle allusions " (N 175).
Complete isolatio n and absolut e concentratio n upon Him who is
recollected ar e expresse d in his sentences . Accordin g to him, the
utterance of the formula Alldhu Akbar, "God is greater" (than
everything), durin g
 the act of ritual prayer is "as if one said 'Thou
art too mighty to be joined by prayer, or to be separate d from by
omitting t o pray': for separatio n and union are not persona l no-
tions, they follow a course preordaine d in eternity " (K 144).
The overwhelmin g greatnes s of God, who teaches man how to
pray and who addresse s him before man dares to address Him, is
visible throug h every word written by Niffarl. 46 This Iraqian mystic,
who died in 965, left writings, called Mawaqif and Mukhatabat,
that seem
 to have been studied carefull y by later Sufis. Even Ibn
cArabi may have been inspired by the daring ideas of this mystical
thinker. Niffarl
 spoke of the state of waqfa, "standing, " during
which he was addresse d by God, who inspired him to write down
His words either during or after this experience . Niffari's whole
work, thus , is presente d as a replica of Muhammad' s experience ,
a dialogue in which man become s the confidan t of God (W 358),
46. Muhammad ibn cAbdi3l-Jabbar an-Niffarl, The "Mawaqif and "Mukhatabat"
of Muhammad  ibn
 ^AbdPl-Jabbar  al-Niffarl with Other Fragments,  ed. A. J. Arberry,
Gibb Memoria l Series, n.s. 9 (London , 1935). Of special importanc e are the texts re-
cently discovere d and edited by Pere Nwyia: Paul Nwyia, Trots oeuvres inedites de
mystiques musulmans: Saqlq al-Balhi, Ibn cAtd, Niffari (Beirut, 1973).

--- Page 104 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 8l
as it is describe d by Pere Nwyia (whose study on Niffari opens
previously undiscovere d perspective s in the experience s of the mys-
tic). Such a dialogue between God and the mystic is not alien to
later Sufis , who not infrequentl y claimed that God spoke to them,
and a compariso n between Niffari's experience s as set forth in his
books wit h those of the eighteenth-centur y Indo-Musli m mystic
Mir Dard (containe d in his cllm ul-kitdb]  would yield significan t
similarities.
Niffari's saying s are full of paradoxes . They show the perfect
passing awa y of the mystic, who has passed beyond all the veils
between th e human and the divine; at the same time they make
clear the impossiblit y of expressin g mystica l experienc e at all. The
center of Niffari's experienc e is that of prayer; over and over he is
taught by God to recollec t Him, and then again the impossibilit y
of this task is put before him: "Thought s are containe d in letters,
and fancie s in thoughts ; the sincere recollectio n of Me is beyond
letter and thoughts , and My name is beyond recollection." 47 God
wants His servant to rest in His recollection , but: "Do not speak,
for he that reaches unto Me does not speak." 48 How, then, is recol-
lection to be performed ? And what meaning does it have? "My
recollection i s the electest thing I have manifested , and My recollec-
tion is a veil." 49 For this recollectio n is containe d in letters, and
Niffari "unmaske d the idolatry of the letter" (W 370) at a time
when Musli m orthodox y was going more and more by the letter
and becomin g increasingl y intellectualized . It was he who spoke
of the hi jab al-ma crifa, "the veil of gnosis" (W 380), which, tender
and subtle as it may be, can constitut e the greatest barrier between
man and God.
Niffari clearl y formulate d the theory—probabl y known to mys-
tics befor e him—tha t prayer is a divine gift: "To Me belongs the
giving: if I had not answere d thy prayer I should not have made
thee seekin g it."50 It is an idea well known in Christia n tradition ,
where it found its most famous expressio n in the words of Pascal:
"You woul d not seek Me if you had not found Me." Much earlier,
it became a cornerston e of the Muslim theolog y of prayer and was
most poeticall y expresse d by Jalaluddi n RumI (see Chapter 3).
47. Maw., no. 55/20.
48. Mukh., no. 22/5.
49. Maw., no. 49/2.
tjo.Mukh., no. 42/10.

--- Page 105 ---
82 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
Niffari als o expresse d the feeling of the persisten t love with which
God follow s man in a divine address that can be compared , as his
modern commentato r has in fact done, to Francis Thompson' s
Hound of  Heaven. 51
In certain aspects the late tenth century was the period of organiza -
tion and consolidatio n for Sufism. It was the time during which, on
the politica l level, the influenc e of differen t Shia groups grew in
every par t of the Muslim Empire . Since 945—th e year of Shibli's
death—Baghdad ha d been under the control of the Iranian Buwai-
hids, a Shia dynasty ; Norther n Syria was ruled by the Hamdanit e
dynasty, whic h was also Shia—Alepp o for a short time rivaling
Baghdad a s a gathering place for poets, philosophers , and musicians .
Central Arabi a had been conquered , in 930, by the Carmathians ,
an extrem e Shia group whose capital was located in Bahrain and
whose branche s extende d to the Indus valley; there, at Multan ,
Hallaj ha d been in touch with them, accordin g to the tradition .
In North Africa, the Shiite Fatimid dynasty was gaining in power;
in 969 they conquere d Egypt, there to establis h a splendid rule
that was to last for two centuries .
It is a well-know n fact that many of the Sufis—an d many of the
pious Sunnite s in general—fel t a kind of sentimenta l allegianc e
to the family of the Prophet without believin g in Shia doctrines .
The veneratio n of CA1I was widesprea d among the Muslims , and
he was often regarde d as an importan t link in the spiritua l chain
leading th e Sufi masters back to the Prophet . Widespread , too, was
the veneratio n of the sayyids, Muhammad' s descendant s through
CA1I and Fatima . Even in our day some of the sayyid families in
countries lik e Muslim India or Pakistan consider themselve s exalted
above the common Muslim , surrounde d by a sanctity or transmit -
ting a baraka (spiritua l power, blessing ) that gives them a peculiar
status. Thi s veneratio n shown to the ahl al-bayt, the Prophet' s
family, constitute s in later times a very importan t aspect of popular
Sufism.
The relationshi p betwee n Shia thought as it crystallize d in the
ninth and tenth centurie s and the theories of Sufism that emerged
at about the same time has not yet been completel y elucidated; 52
51. Maw.,  no. 11/16.
52. Kamil M. ash-Shaybi , As-sila bayn at-tasawwuf  wa?t-tashayyu'-  (Cairo, ca. 1967).
See Seyye d H. Nasr, "Shicism and Sufism, " in Sufi Essais (London , 1972).

--- Page 106 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 83
but some of the Sufi teaching s about the primordia l light of Mu-
hammad an d the theories of saintshi p seem to correspon d very
closely in their hierarchica l structur e to Shiite theories about the
imamate an d the gradual initiatio n of adepts into the deeper realms
of faith, into new levels of spiritual interpretation . The role played
by Jacfar as-Sadiq' s commentar y on the Koran in the formatio n of
some Sufi ideas has already been mentioned . In later times, the con-
nections betwee n these two forms of Muslim spiritualit y became
visible onc e more in the developmen t of the Sufi fraternit y located
in Ardebi l in Northwester n Iran—fro m a regular Sufi order it
turned int o the cell of Shia propagand a in Iran. The activitie s of
this group resulted eventuall y in the victory of Shah Ismail the
Safawid in 1501, and at that time Shiism became the official creed
of Iran. It seems symptomati c that both in Arabic and in early
European source s the Safawid ruler is often called "Sufi" or the
"Grand Sophi. " Yet from that time onward Sufism and the Shia
creed wer e rarely combined , and only a few Shia orders exist to-
day. In spite of the relativel y close relationshi p betwee n the two
movements i n the period of formation , the Sufi congregation s
usually supporte d the Sunni case and often became defender s of
the official Sunnite creed under the later Abbasid caliphs (MM 86).
During th e Abbasid period the need was felt to formulat e some
of the main lines, a Leitbild,  of moderat e Sufism. The case of
Hallaj ha d confronte d the Sufis with the danger of persecution ,
and even without his tragic death one might well have felt that the
Path had to be made accessibl e to people who could never reach the
abysses of mystica l experienc e Hallaj had reached , or who could
not be compare d in sobriety to Junayd, in burning love to Nuri,
or in paradoxica l speech to Shibli. It was left to men like Ibn Khaflf
of Shiraz (d. 982, at about 100 years of age)53 and similar mystics
to teach the Path, to make it understandable—a t least in part—to
the intellectuals , and to set an exampl e to larger groups of the
faithful.
It would, however , be wrong to speak of a real "reconciliation "
between Sufis m and orthodoxy . For the Sufis were, on the whole,
53. CAH ibn Ahmad ad-Dailami , Slrat-i Ibn al-Haftf  ash-Shtrazt,  ed. Annemari e
Schimmel (Ankara , 1955). See Annemari e Schimmel , "Zur Biographi c des Abu cAbdal-
lah ibn Chafif as-Sirazi, " Die Welt des Orients,  1955; and Schimmel , "Ibn Khafif , an
Early Representativ e of Sufism, " Journal  of the Pakistan  Historical  Society,  1959.
N 600 mention s that the famous poet Sacdi (d. 1292) lived close to Ibn Khafif' s tomb
(which is now in a rather dark quarter of Shiraz, close to the charcoa l sellers).

--- Page 107 ---
84 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
as good Muslim s as the rest of the communit y in Baghdad , Nisha-
pur, or Egypt. They did not reject the religiou s law but rather
added to it—addition s that made more exactin g demand s on their
personal lives . The genuin e mystical practices , like the performanc e
of the dhikr, the constan t recollectio n of God, occupie d only part
of their time. Many Sufis followed normal profession s to earn their
livelihoods. Th e surname s of some of them point to these profes-
sions: saqatl,  "huckster" ; halldj, "cotton carder" ; nassaj, "weaver" ;
warrdq, "bookseller " or "copyist" ; qawdrlrl,  "glassmaker" ; hadddd,
"blacksmith" wer e among them. Some would work regularl y and
use a trifle of their gain for themselves , distributin g the main part
to the Sufis, so that it could be said, for example , that a person
"veiled hi s saintlines s under the modest shape of a cupper" (N
572). Som e left their origina l profession s after they had gained
fame as mystica l leaders and attracte d a few disciples . Others were
trained a s theologians , traditionalists , or jurists in one of the four
schools o f law. Still, it was considere d importan t to prove to the
world the perfect orthodox y of Sufi tenets, and therefor e a num-
ber of books were compose d almost simultaneousl y in the last
quarter o f the tenth century .
The oldes t authorit y is Abu Nasr as-Sarraj , from Tus in eastern
Iran (d. 988), whose Kitdb al-lumcf fft-tasawwuf  is an excellen t ex-
position o f the doctrine s of the Sufis, with numerou s quotation s
from the sources . The matters at stake are lucidly laid before the
reader.54 Sarraj , who was for a while a disciple of Ibn Khaflf, is close
enough to the great masters of the Path to understan d and interpre t
their saying s and their way of life. His definition s of the differen t
states and stations , his long quotation s from Sufi prayers and letters,
his words about the behavio r of the Sufis at home and on their jour-
neys, and his explanations o f difficult expression s are of great value
to the student of Sufism, though his book apparentl y has not been
as widely read as other handbooks . Sarraj himself had reached a
high rank in practica l Sufism; accordin g to one story, he was dis-
cussing som e mystica l problem s with his friends on a cold winter
day, "and the sheikh got into a 'state' and put his face on the fire-
place and prostrate d himsel f before God in the midst of the fire
without bein g hurt" (N 283).
54. Kitdb  al-luma*  fPt-tasawwuf,  ed. Reynold A. Nicholson , Gibb Memoria l Series,
no. 22 (Leiden and London , 1914); A. J. Arberry , ed., Pages from the "Kitdb  al-
/umac" (London , 1947).

--- Page 108 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 85
A near contemporar y of Sarraj, al-Kalabadhi , who died in Bu-
khara abou t 990, wrote his Kitdb at-t(farruf  in an effort to find a
middle groun d between orthodox y and Sufism. 55 His book is, on the
whole, th e somewha t dry expositio n of a Hanafi jurist and not as
enjoyable a s Sarraj's study. Yet the work contains valuable materia l
for the study of early Sufism; it was widely read, along with a
commentary, i n medieva l Muslim India. A commentar y of 222
Prophetic tradition s is also ascribed to Kalabadhl . The study of Mu-
hammad's saying s was regarded as essential by the Sufis, who tried
to follow their beloved Prophet' s example as closely as possible .
The third book written during this period was Abu Talib al-
Makki's comprehensiv e Qut al-qulub,  "The Foo d of the Hearts." 56
Though Makk i (d. 996 in Baghdad ) was considere d a follower of
the Salimiyy a school, his book had a pronounce d influenc e on later
Sufi writings . Ghazzal i relied heavily upon this work, and quota-
tions in later sources—i n Rumfs Mathnawl  and in medieva l Indian
books—show ho w widely it was used.
Shortly afte r the compositio n of these three theoretica l books on
the tenets and doctrine s of Sufism, two attempt s were made to deal
with the Sufis in the same way as Arab historian s had dealt with
scholars, heroes , philologists , and other groups: by dividing them
into "classes " belongin g to succeedin g periods . Sulami (d. 1021)
called his work simply Tabaqdt  as-sufiyya,  "The Classes of the Su-
fis." Abu Nucaym al-Isfahan i (d. 1037) chose for his ten-volum e
work the more romanti c title Hilyat al-auliycf,  "The Ornamen t of
the Saints." 57 Beginnin g with the Prophet and his companions , Abu
Nucaym brough t together every availabl e bit of informatio n about
the pious and their deeds; his book is a storehous e of information ,
which, however , must be used with caution. Yet even in its present
edition, whic h is not free from mistakes , the book is indispensabl e
for the study of the biographie s of early Sufis.
Sulami's Tabaqdt  has constitute d a source for later hagiogra -
phers.58 Hal f a century after his death, the book was expande d and
55. Abu Bakr Muhammad al-Kalabadhi, At-tacarruf li-madhhab ahl at-tasawwuf,
ed. A. J. Arberry (Cairo, 1934), trans. A. J. Arberry as The Doctrine of the Sufis (Cam-
bridge, 1935) .
56. Abu Talib al-Makki , Qut al-qulub  ft mu'-dmalat  al-mahbub,  2 vols. (Cairo ,
1310 h./1892-93) .
57. Abu Nu caym al-Isfahani , Hilyat al-auliya?,  10 vols. (Cairo, 1932-38) .
58. cAbdur-Rahman as-Sulami , Kitdb tabaqdt  as-Sufiyya,  ed. Johanne s Pederse n
(Leiden, 1960) , has an extensiv e introduction ; Sulami' s Kitdb has also been edited by
Nuraddln Sharib a (Cairo , 1953). For other edition s see the Bibliograph y under

--- Page 109 ---
86 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
translated into Persian by cAbdullah-i Ansari, the patron saint of
Herat; hi s translation , in turn, was revised and brough t up to date
in the late fifteent h century by Jami, also in Herat, in his Nafahdt
al-uns.
Sulami deal t not only with the biographie s of the mystics , but
also with the differen t strands of Sufism as they had develope d by
his time. He thus concerne d himsel f with the group of the Mala-
matiyya, t o whom he devoted a special treatise. 59 He distinguishe s
between the orthodox people, the ahl al-mafrifa, "gnostics," i.e.,
the true Sufis, and the maldmatiyya,  "those who draw blame (ma-
lama) upon themselves."
The ideal of the Malamatiyy a develope d out of a stress on ikhlds,
"perfect sincerity" ; Ansari sometime s praises a person for his "per-
fect maldma  and sincerity " (N 340). Muhasib i had taught that even
the slightes t tendenc y to show one's piety or one's religiou s behavio r
was ostentation . Thus the Malamati s deliberatel y tried to draw the
contempt o f the world upon themselve s by committin g unseemly ,
even unlawful , actions, but they preserve d perfect purity of heart
and loved God without second thought . Typical is the story told by
Jami: "On e of them was hailed by a large crowd when he entered a
town; the y tried to accompan y the great saint; but on the road he
publicly starte d urinatin g in an unlawfu l way so that all of them left
him and no longer believe d in his high spiritua l rank" (N 264).
These piou s relied upon the Korani c words, "and they do not fear
the blam e of a blaming person" (Sura 5:59), and probabl y also
thought o f the nafs lawwama,  "the blamin g soul," the conscienc e
that warne d them at every step in the religiou s life (Sura 75:2). But
the attitud e itself is not novel—Marija n Mole (MM 72-74 ) has
shown that , particularl y among the early Syrian Christians , there
was a similar trend to hide one's virtuou s actions; stories about some
of these Christia n saints, who would rather live as actors or rope-
dancers tha n show their deep religiou s concern , at once call to mind
anecdotes abou t the Malamatiyya .
Sulami. Siileyma n Ate§, Siilemi ve tasawufi  tefsiri (Istanbul , 1969), is a Turkish study
of the famous commentar y on the Koran by Sulami , a work that still awaits a critical
edition.
59. Richard Hartmann, "As-Sulami's 'Risalat al-Malamatiya,' " Der Islam 8 (1918), is
a fine analysi s of Sulaml' s treatise . For the whole problem see Abdiilbak i Golpmarh ,
Meldmilik ve Meldmiler (Istanbul, 1931); AbuDl-cAlaD Affifi, Al-maldmatiyya wa*s-
sufiyya wa  ahl al-futuwwa  (Cairo, 1945); Morris S. Scale, "The Ethics of Malamatiy a
Sufism and the Sermon of the Mount," Moslem World 58 (1968): i; and the discussion
in Nwyia, Ibn ^-Ata? Allah, p. 244.

--- Page 110 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 87
Al-maldma tark  as-saldma,  "blame is to give up well-being, " says
Hamdun al-Qassar , one of the first among the Khurasania n Sufis to
adopt this way of life (H 67). Sulami sees them as veiled from the
vulgar by God's jealousy : He has granted them all kinds of spiritual
graces, bu t does not expose them to the view of the commo n people;
their outwar d behavio r is that of people who live in separatio n from
God, but inwardl y they dwell in the sweetnes s of divine union.
They thus prefigur e the lover in Persian poetry, who was to describe
himself in terms of a detestabl e creature , calling the hatred of the
"others" upo n himself , but never revealin g the secret of his intense
love.
Hujwm, hal f a century after Sulami, is more critical of the ma-
ldmatl attitude , for even in the actions of those who want to attract
blame upo n themselve s he sees a trace of subtle hypocrisy : "The
ostentatious me n purposel y act in such a way as to win popularity ,
while the maldmatl  purposel y acts in such a way that people reject
him. Both have their thought fixed on mankin d and do not pass
beyond tha t sphere" (H 6). That may sound hard, but from the
viewpoint o f a perfect mystic every interest in people's reaction—b e
it positive or negative—i s a sign of selfishness , and therefor e of
imperfection.
Jaml regarde d the maldmatl  as sincere, mukhlis,  whereas the true
Sufi is mukhlas,  made sincere by God (N 10), not by an act that can
be attribute d to himself . But Jaml, writing in the mid-fifteent h
century, sa w the problem that was involved in the whole maldmatl
attitude mor e clearly than his predecesssor s had. The problem had
arisen whe n people affiliated themselve s with the Malamatiyy a or
claimed to be one of them withou t acceptin g the difficult burden of
genuine maldmatl  practices : "Now a group has brought forth licen-
tiousness an d treating lightly of the Divine law and heresy and lack
of etiquett e and respectlessness—bu t maldmat  was not, that some-
body woul d act by showing no respect to the law: it was, that they
did not care for the people in their service of God." Thus complain s
Ansarl as early as the eleventh century , not long after Sulami, in a
discussion o f the life of Hamdun al-Qassa r (N 61). Jaml accepted
Ansari's assessmen t and went on to contrast the maldmatl,  who ad-
heres to the duties and perform s many supererogator y acts of piety
in secret, and the qalandar,  the wanderin g dervish who perform s
only the absolute minimu m in religiou s duties. The qalandar,  in
his description , is the less rigorous mystic, who enjoys his unfettere d

--- Page 111 ---
88 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
life. The qalandar  is chiefly known in the West as a kind of free
thinker—even a  charlatan—withou t deeper religiou s concern ; but
this, JamI asserts, is not true of the genuine qalandar  (N 15).
Sulami influence d successiv e generation s mainly as teacher and
biographer. Throug h his disciple , Nasrabadi , the mystica l chain
reaches Ab u Sacld ibn Abfl-Khair , to whom the first Persian mysti-
cal quatrain s are, erroneously , ascribed and who was the first to
draw up a simple monasti c rule for his Sufi communit y (see Chapter
5). The spiritua l chain from Sulam i also leads to al-Qushayr i (d.
1074) throug h his father-in-la w Abu CA1I ad-Daqqaq . Qushayr i took
up once more the task of writing a treatise on Sufism. 60 His Risala
describes Suf i teaching s and practice s from the viewpoin t of a full-
fledged Ash carite theologian ; this school—t o which Ibn Khaflf had
belonged a s well—flourishe d in Iran and elsewher e under the Sel-
jukids. Qushayri' s Risala— written in 1046—i s probabl y the most
widely rea d summar y of early Sufism; it was analyzed in the West
prior to most other books on Sufism. It is comparable , in some ways,
to Sarraj's Kitdb al-luma c, beginnin g with short biographie s of the
Sufis and containin g detailed chapter s on Sufi terminolog y and ex-
pressions. Som e of the author's shorter treatises give a good insight
into his own spiritua l experiences , especiall y into his prayer life.61
One of Qushayri' s colleagues , who had attended his meeting s and
had visite d almost every leading Sufi of his time, was Hujwiri from
Ghazna. H e later came to Lahore, the capital of the Ghaznawid s in
India, and he died there in 1071. His shrine, called that of Data
Ganj Bakhsh , is still a popular place of pilgrimag e in Lahore. 62
Hujwirl's importan t innovatio n is that he wrote his Kashf al-
mahjub, "Unveilin g of the Hidden, " in Persian and thus ushered in
a new period in mystica l literature . A monumen t of early Persian
and noteworth y for its expressiveness , the Kashf, "which belongs
to the valid and famous books" (N 316), contains much interestin g
information rarel y found in other sources. Althoug h the author's
60. Abu 3l-Qasim al-Qushayri , Ar-risala  ft Cz7m at-tasawwuf  (Cairo, 1330 h./1911-12) .
Richard Hartmann , Al-Kuschairis  Darstellung  des Sufitums  (Berlin , 1914), is a very
useful analysi s of the Risala.
61. AbiPl-Qasi m al-Qushayri , Ar-rascPil  al-qushayriyya,  ed. and trans. F. M. Hasan
(Karachi, 1964) . The most importan t treatise was edited and analyze d by Fritz Meier,
"Qusayris Tarti b as-suluk, " Oriens 16 (1963).
62. CAH ibn cUthman al-HujwIri , Kashf al-mahjub,  ed. V. A. Zukovski j (Leningrad ,
1926; reprin t ed., Tehran , 1336 sh./ig57) ; al-Hujwiri , The "Kashf al-Mahjub,"  The
Oldest Persian  Treatise  on Sufism by al-Hujwirl,  trans. Reynol d A. Nicholson , Gibb
Memorial Series , no. 17 (1911; reprint ed., London , 1959).

--- Page 112 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 89
inclination towar d systematizatio n sometime s goes too far, it is
singularly valuabl e in its approac h and its balanced discussion .
The easter n province s of Iran have always been proud to be a fer-
tile soil for mysticall y inclined souls. A contemporar y of Qushayri
and Hujwir i was cAbdullah-i Ansar l (1006-89) , whose work, like
that of Hujwiri , was written in part in his Persian mothe r tongue. 63
It proves the breadth of spirit of Sufism that two masters so totally
different i n their outlook as Qushayr i and Ansari could live at close
proximity durin g the same politicall y restless period. While Qu-
shayri followe d the Ashcarite cree d of the ruling Seljukids , Ansarl
belonged t o the stern Hanbalit e school of law. The traditiona l idea
that Hanbalit e rigorism and mystica l emotion are mutuall y exclu-
sive can no longer be maintained—no t only was Ansarl an energeti c
representative o f this school, but cAbduDl-Qadir Gilanl , the founder
of the most widesprea d mystica l fraternity , also belonge d to this
madhhab. Perhap s it was precisely the strict adherenc e to the out-
ward lette r of the God-give n law and the deep respect for the divine
word tha t enabled Ansarl and his fellow Hanbalite s to reach a
deeper understandin g of the secrets of the revelation .
Ansari's fathe r had been a mystic, too; when the boy was still
small, his father had left his family to join friends in Balkh. The
young schola r pursued his studies in Herat and Nishapur . He tried
several time s to perform the pilgrimag e to Mecca but was detained
because o f confused politica l circumstance s in the eastern province s
occasioned b y the untimel y death in 1030 of Mahmu d of Ghazna,
the conquero r of northwester n India and supporte r of the caliph
and of Muslim orthodoxy .
Although youn g Ansarl did not reach Mecca, his life was changed
by his meeting with the distinguishe d mystic Kharaqan i in 1034,
shortly befor e the master died at the age of eighty. Kharaqani' s
sayings, preserve d in the Tadhkirat  al-auliyd  and elsewhere , show
tremendous force , but are devoid alike of any learnednes s or theo-
logical systematization . This illiterate peasant , who could not pro-
nounce Arabi c correctly (N 336, 353), was a typical uwaysi, initiated
not by a living master but by the powerfu l spirit of Bayezid Bistami.
Legends dwel l on the spiritua l relation between these two men: it is
said that the scent of Kharaqan i reached Bayezid long before his
63. Serge de Laugier de Beaureceuil , Khwadja  Abdullah  Ansari, mystique  hanbalite
(Beirut,1965), i s a fine study of Ansari and his work. Pere Beaureceui l has also edited
some of Ansari's works with their commentaries .

--- Page 113 ---
go / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
spiritual discipl e was born (M 4:1802-50 ) and that Kharaqan i used
to pray every evening in Kharaqan , then mysteriousl y be trans-
ported to Bistam— a typical miracle of "rolling up space"—pra y
there, and then perform the mornin g prayer back in his own vil-
lage (T 2:201).
Kharaqam's prayer s burn with intense love and yearning , as
when he swore that he would not give his soul to the angel of death,
for he had received it from God, and only to Him would he return it
(T 2:212) . Longing for God made him melt away, but the Lord told
him, in one of his rare dreams after long periods of sleeplessness ,
that the longing he had endured for sixty years was nothing, "for
We have loved thee already in the pre-eternit y of eternities " (T
2:253). An d he was sure that he would be resurrecte d among the
martyrs, "fo r I have been killed by the sword of longing for Thee"
(T 2:2 2 9), as he asserts.
This enthusiasti c and demandin g master caused a spiritual
change in cAbdullah-i Ansari, wit h the result that Ansari began to
write his commentar y on the Koran, which was, unhappily , never
finished. Th e advent of the Seljuks in eastern Iran in 1041 brought
affliction o n Ansari; he was persecuted , spent years in destitution ,
and endure d much sufferin g at the hands of the authoritie s in their
defense of Ashcarite theology . The grand vizier Nizamulmul k even
exiled him from Herat in 1066, but he was soon called back. Shortly
afterward th e caliph himself honored the famous orator and mighty
preacher whos e fame had spread around Herat. Eventuall y Ansari
lost his sight and spent the last eight years of his life in darknes s and
under the threat of another expulsion . He died in Herat on 8 March
1089.
Ansari's productivit y is amazing in light of the difficultie s he had
to face during his career. Among the great number of books written
in both Arabic and Persian , the Mandzil as-sd^irin,  "The Station s on
the Way," has had several commentators. 64 The mystic of Herat also
translated Sulami' s Tabaqdt  into the Persian vernacula r of his
region. Bu t in spite of his many works in theoretica l Sufism, his
smallest boo k has won him the greatest admiration : the Mundjdt,
"Orisons," a  prayer book in rhymin g Persian prose, intersperse d
with some verses, in which he pours out his love, his longing, and his
64. Hellmu t Ritter, "Philologik a VIII: Ansari Herewi.—Sena 3! Gaznewi, " Der Islam
22 (1934) ; Vladimi r Ivanow, "Tabaqa t of Angarl in the Old Languag e of Herat,"
Journal o f the Royal Asiatic Society, January-Jul y 1923.

--- Page 114 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / Ql
advice.65 It s simple and melodiou s Persian prose makes this small
book a true vade mecum for anyone who needs a devotiona l aid for
meditation i n lonely hours.
Nothing show s better the change in emphasi s and style, in Sufi
outlook an d expression , than a compariso n of Ansari's Munajdt  with
another smal l book written in the same mixture of poetry and prose
in the same city of Herat 400 years later, by the author who re-
worked Ansari' s hagiographica l book and relied heavily upon him,
namely th e Lawcfih,  by Maulan a Jami. This book has become one
of the most widely used manuals of later Sufi teachings—bu t how far
is its intellectua l and rational approac h to the divine truth, its high-
flown technica l expressio n about absolute existenc e and relative
being, fro m the intense earnestnes s and simplicit y of Ansari's
orisons!
At the same time that Ansari was being persecute d by the Seljuk
government, anothe r mystic was cooperatin g with that regime and
lending it support through his writings . That was Abu Hamid al-
Ghazzali, Ash carite theologia n and, later, mystic, who has often
been calle d the greatest Muslim after Muhammad . An anecdot e
told by Jami illustrate s how highly esteeme d he was in most moder-
ate Sufi circles: "The North African Sufi leader Abu'l-Hasa n ash-
Shadhili (d . 1258) saw in a dream vision that the Prophet of Islam
was extollin g himself with Ghazzal i before Moses and Jesus . . . and
he had ordered the punishmen t of some who had denied him, and
the marks of the whip remaine d visible on their bodies until they
died" (N 373).
Ghazzali wa s born in Tus, near present-da y Meshed , in 1058,
three year s after the Seljuks had taken over the rule in Baghdad . His
life was closely connecte d with the fate of this dynasty, whose power
grew in the ensuing years to extend over all of Iran and parts of
eastern Anatolia . Abu Hamid , along with his younge r brother
Ahmad, followe d the usual course of theologica l studies; the teacher
to whom he owed most and with whom he worked closely was al-
Juwaini, surname d the imam al-haramayn  (d. 1083). Nizamulmulk ,
the vizier , appointe d Ghazzal i professo r at the Nizamiyy a madrasa
in Baghdad . With the zeal of an ardent adheren t of Ashcarite the-
ology, the vizier had founded colleges (madrasa)  all over the Seljuk
65. cAbdullah-i Ansari , Munajdt u nasd^ih (Berlin, 1924); this little book has been
reprinted man y times. Ansari, The Invocations  of Shaikh Abdullah  Ansari, trans. Sir
Jogendra Singh , 3ded. (London , 1959); Singh's translatio n lacks the rhymin g patterns ,
which are essential , and the poetic flavor.

--- Page 115 ---
92 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
territories. The y served as training institution s for theologian s and
proved to be models for later colleges in the Muslim world.
The schoo l at Baghdad , the seat of the caliphate , was without
doubt the most importan t among the institution s founded by Ni-
zamulmulk. I t therefor e caused great amazemen t when the success-
ful professo r Ghazzali , after a breakdow n in 1095, left his teaching
position t o enter the spiritual life. After long journey s that led him
to Syria, Jerusalem , and perhaps Egypt, Abu Hamid returned to his
home and family and once more taught in his hometow n of Tus.
There he died in Decembe r 1111. 66
Ghazzali's literar y activity was as great as that of any of his col-
leagues; hi s books cover differen t branches of learning , but mainly
theology an d its confrontatio n with philosophy . We are fortunat e
enough t o possess his spiritua l autobiography , written after his
"conversion." I t is called Al-munqidh  min ad-daldl,  "The Delivere r
from Error, " and has often been translated; 67 it has even been com-
pared to Augustine' s Confessions,  though it conveys nothing of the
author's earlie r external life. Rather it shows his attempts at coping
with the various elements of Islamic intellectua l life that confronte d
him in the course of his studies and his teaching . He had studied the
works of the philosopher s who, inspired by Greek thought , had de-
veloped th e logical tools required for scholarly discussion , but who
had nevertheles s remained , in the opinion of the faithful, outside
the pale of orthodo x Islam. Ghazzali' s works refuting the philo-
sophical doctrine s were in turn refuted by Averroe s (d. 1198), the
66. The literatur e about Ghazzali is almost inexhaustible ; some major works and
translations are : Duncan Black Macdonald , "The Life of al-Ghazzali, " Journal of the
American Oriental  Society 20 (1899); Arend Jan Wensinck , La pensee de Ghazzali
(Paris, 1940) ; W. Montgomer y Watt, Muslim Intellectual:  A Study of Al-Ghazali  (Edin-
burg, 1963) . The first independen t study on Ghazzal i appeared in Berlin in 1858:
Reinhard Gosche , Uber Ghazzalis  Leben und Werke; later, the Spanish scholar Asin
Palacios devote d a number of books and articles to him. Philosophica l investigation s
ot problem s of Ghazzali' s thought and faith were introduce d by Julius Obermann ,
Der religiose  und philosophische  Subjektivismus  Gazzalls (Leipzig , 1921), a book the
main thesi s of which can no longer be accepted . Pere Farid Jabre has devoted several
important book s to Ghazzali' s theology . A good introductio n into particula r problem s
of Ghazzali' s theologica l approach is Fadlou Shehadi , Ghazall's  Unique Unknowable
God (Leiden , 1964); The Ethical  Philosophy  of al-Ghazzdll  has been studied by
Muhammad Umaruddi n (Aligarh , 1951). The Dutch scholar Arend Theodo r van
Leeuwen see s Ghazzali , correctly , as apologist : Ghazdli as apologeet  van den Islam
(Leiden, 1947) .
67. Abu Hamid al-Ghazzali , Al-munqidh  min ad-daldl,  ed. A. Mahmu d (Cairo,
1952); translate d by W. Montgomer y Watt as The Faith and Practice  of Al-Ghazali
(London, 1953) ; other translation s have been done by Claud H. Field (London , 1910);
J. H. Kramers (Amsterdam , 1951); and Barbier de Meynard , in Journal asiatique,  1877.

--- Page 116 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / 93
greatest Arabi c commentato r on Aristotle ; some of them served
medieval Christia n theologian s in their fight against the Averrois t
school.
The main source of danger for the Seljuks was, in Nizamulmulk' s
and in Ghazzali' s view, the Ismaili movement , a branch of Shia
thought tha t had gained a firm footing in various parts of the Mid-
dle East. Egypt was still ruled by the Fatimid caliphs. During Ghaz-
zali's lifetime , in 1094, the Persian Ismaili leader Hasan-i Sabbah
took the side of the younger son of the Fatimid caliph during the
struggle fo r succession , with the result that an Ismaili spiritual es-
tate was built up around this Nizar on the mountai n castle Alamut
near Kazvin . From there the Ismailis threatene d orthodo x Muslim s
and, later, the Crusaders ; Nizamulmul k fell victim to one of Hasan-i
Sabbah's disciples , known as the Assassins . Ghazzal i wrote several
treatises agains t these bdtiniyya,  "the people of esoteric meaning, "
and in his autobiograph y tried once more to explain the dangers in-
herent in the Ismaili system, especiall y in the doctrine of the neces-
sity of the guidanc e of an infallibl e imam, which seemed to him
particularly dangerou s to the Sunnite community .
Another grou p with which the medieva l scholar concerne d him-
self was his own colleagues , the theologian s and lawyer divines—
that class of learned men who practicall y ruled the life of the Mus-
lims by their interpretatio n of the divine law. Their concern with
the outwar d details of the law had always been a point of criticism
for the pious, and particularl y for the Sufis. Their worldlines s and
their man y connection s with the governmen t aroused those
who, acutel y consciou s of the danger of fossilizatio n of the revealed
word unde r the crust of legal formalism , strove after the interioriza -
tion of religion. Ghazzal i wrote: "Those who are so learned about
rare forms of divorce can tell you nothing about the simpler things
of the spiritua l life, such as the meaning of sincerity towards God or
trust in Him." 68 Acquainte d with all aspects of Muslim intellectua l
life, and having proved his philosophica l and logical adroitnes s in
many defense s of orthodo x Islam, Ghazzal i eventuall y turned to
mysticism. Perhap s this was a response to his long-standin g skepti-
cism; perhap s a sudden conversio n led him to the mystica l quest.
Whatever th e reason, it was typical of Ghazzal i that he approache d
the mystica l Path first from the intellectua l side. As he says: "Knowl-
edge was easier for me than activity . I began by reading their books
68. Watt, Muslim  Intellectual,  p. 113.

--- Page 117 ---
94 / HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM
. . . and obtaine d a thorough intellectua l understandin g of their
principles. The n I realized that what is most distinctiv e of them can
be attaine d only by persona l experience , ecstasy, and a change of
character."69 W e may understan d this change to "gnosis because of
agnosticism" an d agree with W. H. Temple Gairdner' s fine remark:
"What save d God for him from his obliteratin g agnosticis m was the
experience of the mystic leap, his own personal mfraj."70 And there
it does not matter very much that we do not know who his mystical
guide was nor to whom his chain of initiatio n goes back. We only
know tha t out of his experienc e came his greatest work, the Ihya?
'ulum ad-din,  "Revival of the Religiou s Sciences, " a comprehen -
sive work of forty chapters—fort y being the number of patience and
trial, the number of days of seclusion that the adept undergoe s at the
beginning o f the Path. The numbe r forty is often identica l with
"multitude" an d is thought to compris e an almost infinite number
of items; therefore collections of forty hadlth (arbcflri) or of forty
pious sentence s are very commo n in the Muslim world. It seems to
me typica l of Ghazzali' s way of thought that the center of the book,
the twentiet h chapter, is devoted to the central figure in Islam, the
Prophet Muhammad. 71
The first quarter of the Ihya? is entitled ^Ibdddt, "Matters of Wor-
ship and Service" ; it begins with a chapter on knowledg e but deals,
in general , with ritual question s like purity, prayers, and devotiona l
acts. Each prescriptio n is preceded by Koranic verses and Propheti c
traditions an d is explaine d by the practice of the early faithful and
Sufis. The second part of the book deals with the "Customs, " and
corresponds, t o an extent, to the teaching s as laid down in the adab-
books: ho w to eat and drink, how to lead a married life, and the like
69. Ibid., p. 135.
70. W. H. Temple Gairdner , The Niche for Lights (London , 1915), p. 51.
71. Abu Hamid al-Ghazzall , Ihya? ^ulum ad-dln, 4 vols. (Bulaq, Egypt, 1289
h./i87a); commentar y by the Indian-bor n scholar Sayyid Murtad a az-Zabldi , Ithdf as-
sddat al-muttaqln,  10 vols. (Cairo, 1311 h./1893-94) . The Ihya? has been analyze d in
G. H. Bousquet' s useful book "Ih-'yd ^ouloum  ad-din" ou viviftcation  des sciences  de
la foi (Paris, 1955), which contain s summarie s of all forty chapters . Part translation s
are: Hans Bauer, Islamische  Ethik, 4 vols. (Halle, 1916); Hans Wehr, Al-Ghazdll's  Buck
vom Gottvertrauen  (Halle, 1940); Herman Henry Dingemans , Al-Ghazdll's  boek der
liefde (Leiden, 1938), not fully satisfactory; Leon Bercher and G. H. Bousquet, Le
livre des bon usages en matiere  de mariage  (Paris, 1953); Susanna Wilzer, "Untersuch -
ungen zu Gazzali' s 'kitdb at-tauba,'"  Der Islam 32-33 (1955-57) ; William McKane , Al-
Ghazdll's Book  of Fear and Hope (Leiden, 1962); Nabih A. Faris, The Book of Knowl-
edge (Lahore , 1962); Leon Zolondek , Book XX of al-Gazdli's  "Ihyd y culum ad-Din"
(Leiden, 1963) ; Heinz Kindermann , Vber die guten Sitten beim Essen und Trinken
(Leiden, 1964) ; Nabih A. Faris, The Mysteries  of Almsgiving  (Beirut, 1966).

--- Page 118 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINES OF CLASSICAL SUFISM / 95
—problems tha t the modern Western reader does not readily relate
to religion but that are, in the Islamic (as in the Jewish) view, as
much subjec t to religiou s rules as is the act of worship . For man
should fee l every moment that he is in the presence of God, even
when occupie d by the most worldl y activities , and he should be pre-
pared to meet his Lord at any moment of his life.
After the central chapter on the Prophet and his exalted qualities ,
the third section of the book deals with "Thing s Leading to De-
struction" an d the last one with "Thing s Leading to Salvation. "
This fina l part is closest to what we would expect from a mystical
writer: it discusses the differen t stations and states of the wayfarer ,
like povert y and renunciation , patience and gratitude , love and
longing. Her e we find some of the finest passages of the whole book,
all of which is written in a lucid style with simple, logical argu-
ments. In the chapter on "Love and Longing, " Ghazzal l has ex-
pressed som e of his personal experience s of the Path to God, which
never end s but leads to ever new depths.
The whol e Ihya? may be called a preparatio n for death: its last
chapter is devoted to death in its terrible and its lovable aspects:
terrible, because  it brings man into the presence of the stern judge
at Doomsday , which may be the beginnin g of everlastin g punish-
ment; lovable , since it brings the lover into the presenc e of his
eternal belove d and thus fulfills the longing of the soul, which has
finally foun d eternal peace. All that Ghazzal l teaches in the preced-
ing thirty-nin e chapters is only to help man to live a life in accor-
dance wit h the sacred law, not by clinging exclusivel y to its letter
but by an understandin g of its deeper meaning , by a sanctificatio n of
the whole life, so that he is ready for the meeting with his Lord at
any moment .
This teaching— a marriag e between mysticis m and law—ha s made
Ghazzall th e most influentia l theologia n of medieva l Islam. 72 To
fully appreciat e his achievemen t one must remembe r that during
72. Of Ghazzali' s other works the followin g translation s have been published :
Margaret Smith , "Al-Ghazzali , ar-risala al-ladunnlya, " Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 1938 ; Hellmu t Ritter, Das Elixir der Gliickseligkeit,  aus den persischen  und
arabischen Quellen  in Auswahl  iibertragen  (Jena, 1923); Mohamme d Brugsch , Die
kostbare Perle  im Wissen  des Jenseits  (Hannover , 1924), an eschatologica l treatise ;
Ernst Bannerth , Der Pfad der Gottesdiener  (Salzburg , 1964), the spuriou s Minhdj al-
cabidin; R . R. C. Bagley, Ghazali's  Book of Counsel  for Kings (naslhat al-muluk)  (Ox-
ford, 1964) , a politico-ethica l treatise ; Franz-Elma r Wilms, Al-Ghazdlls  Schrift wider
die Gottheit  Jesu (Leiden, 1966), a translatio n of Ar-radd  al-jamll,  a polemic work
against Christia n theology . Others who have edited or translate d some of Ghazzali' s

--- Page 119 ---
96 / HISTORICA L OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M
his lifetim e the first signs of Sufi theosoph y became visible; certain
mystics wer e more intereste d in gnostic knowledg e than in the prac-
tical way of life as taught by the early Sufis. Since Ghazzal i was ap-
prehensive o f the dangers of esoteric and gnostic currents inside
Islam (as he had shown in his struggle against Ismaili theories ) and
at the same time scorned the rigidity and pedantr y of the scholars
and jurists , he undertoo k in his book to "live through the verities
of faith and test those verities through the Sufi experimenta l
method."73
It is the life of the heart that matters, and Ghazzall' s method of
combining th e life of the heart in strict accord with the law and with
a theologicall y sound attitude made even orthodo x theologian s take
the Sufi movemen t seriously . The moderat e Sufi outlook began to
color the life of most average Muslims . On the other hand, Ghaz-
zall's struggl e against Hellenisti c influence s and a more or less Neo-
platonic philosoph y was probably instrumenta l in repudiatin g these
currents fo r a while. During that time, however , they crystallize d
anew and came back as Sufi theosophy , a new developmen t destined
to take shape in the century after Ghazzall' s death.
One of the most puzzling question s among the many unsolve d
problems fo r the scholar is where to place Ghazzall' s Mishkdt  al-
anwdr, "Th e Niche for Lights," in the whole body of his writings . It
may be regarde d as an expressio n of that set of opinion s that the
perfected mysti c "believe s in secret between himself and Allah, and
never mention s except to an inner circle of his students." 74 In this
book he reaches heights of mystica l speculatio n that are almost
"gnostic" whe n he interpret s the Light verse of the Koran (Sura
24:35) an d the tradition about the seventy thousan d veils of light
and darknes s that separate man from God: in his fourfold classifica -
tion he does not hesitate to put most of the pious orthodo x behind
the "veils mixed of darknes s and light," whereas even certain phi-
losophers ar e "veiled by pure light." The Mishkdt  al-anwdr  shows a
highly develope d light metaphysics—Go d is the Light—an d many
later mystic s have relied upon this book rather than upon his Ihya3
culum ad-din.
works are Ignaz Goldziher , Otto Pretzl, Samuel van den Berghe , Heinric h Frick, and
Duncan Blac k Macdonald . There is a good bibliograph y in Peter Antes, Das Prophe-
tenwunder i n der friihen Ascariya bi s al-Gazdli  (Freiburg , 1970).
73. Fazlu r Rahman , Islam (London , 1966), p. 144.
74. Gairdner , Niche for Lights,  p. 19; see Arend Jan Wensinck , "Ghazall' s Mishkdt
al-anwdr," Semietische  Studien,  1941.

--- Page 120 ---
HISTORICAL OUTLINE S OF CLASSICA L SUFIS M / Q7
No thinke r of medieva l Islam has attracted the interest of West-
ern scholar s more than Ghazzali . Numerou s translation s of his
works are availabl e in Western languages . Discussion s about Ghaz-
zalfs true characte r have been going on for decades. Was he a sub-
jectivist, o r a faithful member of the Muslim communit y who ac-
cepted the given religiou s fact? How can the divergen t viewpoint s
on the several issues of philosoph y and theolog y be explained ? To
what exten t was he sincere in his conversion ? Many aspects of his
thought hav e been studied in recent years, but much remains to be
done.
Will the admiratio n reflecte d in Shadhili' s dream continue ?
Many a Western scholar, though in milder words, would subscrib e
to it. Or will Pere Anawati' s criticism prove right: "Thoug h so
brilliant, hi s contributio n did not succeed in preventin g the an-
chylosis tha t two or three centurie s later was to congeal Muslim
religious thought"? 75 Or was his greatnes s itself the reason for the
congealing o f moderat e Islam?
75. G.-C. Anawati and Louis Gardet, Mystique  musulmane  (Paris, 1961), p. 51.

--- Page 121 ---
THE PAT H
THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE PATH
Mystics i n every religiou s traditio n have tended to de-
scribe the differen t steps on the way that leads toward God by the
image of the Path. The Christia n tripartit e division of the via purga-
tiva, the via contemplativa,  and the via illuminativa  is, to some ex-
tent, the same as the Islamic definitio n otshar'fa,  tariqa, and haqiqa.
The tariqa,  the "path" on which the mystics walk, has been de-
fined as "the path which comes out of the sharfa,  for the main road
is called shar c, the path, tariq." This derivatio n shows that the Sufis
considered th e path of mystica l educatio n a branch of that high-
way that consists of the God-given  law, on which every Muslim
is suppose d to walk. No path can exist without a main road from
which it branche s out; no mystica l experienc e can be realized if
the binding injunctions of the shar'fa are not followed faithfully
first.1 The path, tariqa, however , is narrowe r and more difficult to
walk and leads the adept—calle d salik, "wayfarer"—i n his suliik,
"wandering," throug h differen t stations (maqam)  until he perhaps
i.Qutbaddln al-clbadi, At-tasfiya  fi ahwal as-suftya,  or Siifindme,  ed. Ghulam
Muhammad Yusufi (Tehran, 134 7 sh./igGS) , p. 15.
983-

--- Page 122 ---
THE PATH / 99
reaches, mor e or less slowly, his goal, the perfect tauhid, the exis-
tential confessio n that God is One.
The tripartit e way to God is explaine d by a tradition attribute d
to the Prophet: "The sharlca are my words [aqwdll], the tariqa are
my action s [acmdli], an d the haqiqa is my interio r states [ahwdll]."
Shared, tariqa,  and haqiqa  are mutuall y interdependent :
The law withou t truth is ostentation , and the truth without the law is
hypocrisy. Thei r mutual relation may be compare d to that of body and
spirit: whe n the spirit departs from the body, the living body become s a
corpse, an d the spirit vanishes like wind. The Muslim' s professio n of
faith include s both: the words "There is no god but Allah" are the
Truth, an d the words "Muhamma d is the apostle of God" are the Law.
Any one who denies the Truth is an infidel, and any one who rejects the
Law is a heretic. (H 383)
"To kiss the threshol d of the shared" 2 was the first duty of anyone
who wante d to enter the mystica l path. Th e poets have often spoken
in verses , and the mystics in poignan t sentences , of the differen t
aspects of these three levels (sometime s macrifa, "gnosis, " would be
substituted fo r haqiqa, "truth") . Thus it is said in Turkey :
Sharfa: yours is yours, mine is mine.
Tariqa: your s is yours, mine is yours too.
Macrifa: ther e is neither mine nor thine.
The meanin g is this: in the tariqa, the mystic should practic e ithar,
i.e., preferrin g others to himself , but in the unitive stage the differ-
ence betwee n mine and thine has been subsume d in the divine
unity.
Once the mystics had identifie d these three main parts of religiou s
life, they began to analyze the differen t stages and station s that the
wayfarer ha s to pass on his way. They distinguishe d betwee n maqdm,
"station," an d hal, "state": "State is somethin g that descend s from
God into a man's heart, without his being able to repel it when it
comes, or to attract it when it goes, by his own effort" (H 181). Or,
as Rumi puts it more poetically :
The hal is like the unveilin g of the beauteou s bride,
while the maqdm  is the [king's] being alone with the
bride.
(M 1:1435 )
The maqdm  is a lasting stage, which man reaches , to a certain ex-
tent, by his own striving . It belongs to the categor y of acts, whereas
2. Abu 3l-Majd Majdu d Sana DI, SancPPdbad,  line 39.

--- Page 123 ---
1OO / THE PATH
the states are gifts of grace. The maqdmdt,  "stations, " define the
different stage s the wayfare r has attained in his ascetic and moral
discipline. H e is expected to fulfill completel y the obligation s per-
taining to the respectiv e stations, e.g., he must not act in the station
of respect as if he were still in the station of repentance ; he also must
not leave the station in which he dwells before having complete d all
its requirements . The states that come over him will vary accordin g
to the station in which he is presentl y living; thus the qabd, "con-
traction," o f someone in the station of poverty is different from the
qabd of someone in the station of longing.
The mystica l theoretician s were not certain whether a state could
be appropriate d and kept for a while or whether it was a passing ex-
perience; the y also differ in their classificatio n of the stations and in
their descriptio n of certain experience s that are seen sometime s as
stations, sometime s as states. Even the sequenc e of the stations is not
always clear ; it varies accordin g to the capacity of the adept, and
God's activit y can change stations or grant the wayfare r a state with-
out apparen t reason.
Three of the early classification s show the variabilit y of the
sequence.
DhuDn-Nun speak s of faith, fear, reverence , obedience , hope, love,
suffering, an d intimacy ; he classifie s the last three stations as confusion ,
poverty, an d union (A 9:374).
His younge r contemporar y in Iran, Yahya ibn Mucadh, give s a spiri-
tual chain closer to the generall y accepte d form—repentance , asceticism ,
peace in God's will, fear, longing, love, and gnosis (A 10:64).
And the Iraqian Sahl at-Tustari , again a few years younger , defines
the sequenc e as follows: response to God's call, turning toward Him, re-
pentance, forgivenes s of sins, loneliness , steadfastness , meditation , gno-
sis, discourse , election , and friendshi p (G 4:43).
The manual s of Sufism enumerat e still other stations; but the main
steps are always repentance , trust in God, and poverty , which may
lead to contentment , to the differen t degrees of love, or to gnosis,
according t o the mental predilectio n of the wayfarer . In order to
enter the spiritua l path, the adept—calle d murld, "he who has made
up his will" (to enter the Path)—i s in need of a guide to lead him
through th e differen t stations and to point the way toward the goal.
Ad-dln nasiha,  "religion consist s of giving good advice, " was a
Prophetic traditio n dear to the mystics, who saw in the constan t
supervision o f the disciple' s way by the mystica l guide a conditio

--- Page 124 ---
THE PATH / 101
sine qua non for true progress , though the image of the sheikh at-
tarblya, wh o acutely supervise d every breath of the murtd, has de-
veloped onl y in the course of time. A later mystic has compare d the
master—sheikh i n Arabic, pir in Persian—t o the prophet (for a tradi-
tion says that "the sheikh in his group is like the prophet in his
people"): "Al l the prophet s have come in order to open people' s
eyes to see their own faults and God's perfection , their ow n weak-
ness and God's power, their own injustic e and God's justice ....
And the shaikh is also there for the purpose of opening the eyes of
his disciples " (N 441). The master who had to teach the method and
the exercise s had first to test the adept to determin e whether he was
willing an d able to undergo the hardship s that awaited him on the
Path. The newcome r was sometime s made to wait for days at the
sheikh's door , and sometime s as a first test was treated very rudely.
Usually thre e years of service were required before the adept could
be formall y accepted in a master's group—on e year in the service of
the people , one in the service of God, and one year in watchin g over
his own heart.
The method s of humiliatin g future Sufis were numerous . If they
were ordere d to beg so that they would be rebuked by the people,
the intent was not the material profit derived from begging , but the
discipline. Shibli , once a high governmen t official, eventuall y
reached th e point of saying: "I deem myself the meanest of God's
creatures" ( H 359), and only then was he accepted by Junayd. A
story that illustrate s this attitude very well is told about Majdudd m
BaghdadI i n the twelfth century :
When he entered the service of a sheikh, he was made to serve "at the
place of ablution, " i.e., to clean the latrines . His mother, a well-to-d o
lady physician , asked the master to exempt the tender boy from this
work, and sent him twelve Turkish slaves to do the cleaning . But he
replied: "Yo u are a physician—i f your son had an inflammatio n of the
gall bladder , should I give the medicin e to a Turkish slave instead of
giving it to him?" (N 424)
The discipl e would probabl y not have undergon e these trials had
he not had absolut e trust in his master. It was, and still is, a rule
that a preforme d affinity has to exist between master and disciple .
Many Sufi s wandere d for years throughou t the Islamic world in
search of a pir to whom they could surrende r completely ; and a
number o f sheikhs would not accept a new disciple unless they had
seen his name written on the Well-preserve d Tablet among their

--- Page 125 ---
1O2 / THE PATH
followers ( N 536, 538). Did not the Prophet say that the spirits are
like armies—thos e who know each other become friendl y with
each other ?
After the adept had performe d the three years of service he might
be considere d worthy of receivin g the khirqa,  the patched frock,
"the badg e of the aspirant s of Sufism" (H 45). The relation of the
novice to the master is threefold : by the khirqa, by being instructe d
in the formula of dhikr (recollection) , and by compan y (suhbat),
service, an d educatio n (N 560). In investin g the murld with the
patched frock , Sufism has preserve d the old symbolis m of garments :
by donnin g a garment that has been worn, or even touched , by the
blessed hand s of a master, the disciple acquires some of the baraka,
the mystico-magica l power of the sheikh. Later Sufism knows two
kinds of khirqa: the khirqa-yi  irada, which the aspirant gets from
the master to whom he has sworn allegiance , and the khirqa-yi  tabar-
ruk, the "frock of blessing, " which he may obtain from differen t
masters wit h whom he has lived or whom he has visited during his
journeys—if a  master considere d him worthy of receivin g some of
his baraka.  The khirqa-yi  irada is bestowe d upon him only by his
true mystica l leader, who is responsibl e for his progress .
The khirqa  was usually dark blue. It was practica l for travel,
since dirt was not easily visible on it, and at the same time it was
the color of mournin g and distress ; its intention was to show that
the Sufi had separate d himself from the world and what is in it.
In Persian poetry the violet has often been compare d to a Sufi who
sits, his head on his knees, in the attitude of meditation , modestl y
wrapped i n his dark blue frock among the radiant flowers of the
garden. In later times in certain circles mystics would choose for
their frock s a color that corresponde d to their mystica l station
(CL 166), and sabzpush,  "he who wears green," has always been
an epithet for those who live on the highest possible spiritua l level
—be they angels, the Prophet , or Khidr, the guide of the mystics
(cf. V 52).
The patche d frock was, of course, often interprete d in a spiritual
sense; warning s against attributin g too much importanc e to this
woolen dres s were not infrequent : "Purity (safa) is a gift from God,
whereas woo l (suf) is the clothing of animals" (H 48). Some of the
Sufis invente d complicate d rules for the sewing and stitchin g of
their patche d frocks, disputin g whether to use thin or coarse thread
in putting the patches together , and for some of them these exter-

--- Page 126 ---
THE PATH / 1O3
nals were so importan t that others might accuse them of worship -
ing the khirqa like an idol. The mystica l interpretatio n of the
dervish gar b is given in a fine passage by Hujwiri :
Its collar is annihilatio n of intercours e [with men], its two sleeves are
observance an d continence , its two gussets are poverty and purity, its
belt is persistenc e in contemplation , its hem is tranquillit y in [God's]
presence, an d its fringe is settlemen t in the abode of union. (H 56)
The novic e who has entered the master' s group become s "like
the son of the sheikh" ; he is considere d part of him accordin g to the
tradition, "th e son is part of the father." The sheikh helps him
to give birth to a true "heart" and nourishe s him with spiritua l
milk like a mother, as it is often repeated .
The Sufi s have always been well aware of the danger s of the
spiritual pat h and therefor e attribute d to the sheikh almost un-
limited authority : "When someon e has no sheikh, Satan become s
his sheikh, " says a tradition , for the satanic insinuation s are mani-
fold; the murld may even feel uplifted and console d by certain
experiences tha t are, in reality, insinuation s of his lower self or of a
misguiding power . Here the sheikh has to control him and lead him
back on the correct path, for
whoever travel s without a guide
needs two hundre d years for a two days journey .
(M 3:588 )
One migh t read all the books of instructio n for a thousand years,
but withou t a guide nothing would be achieve d (Y 514).
The maste r watche s every momen t of the disciple' s spiritua l
growth; h e watches him particularl y during the forty-da y period of
meditation (arbcfln,  chilla) that became, very early, a regular insti-
tution in the Sufi path (derived , as Hujwiri says, from the forty-da y
fast of Moses, when he hoped for a vision from God, as related in
Sura 7:138) . The sheikh interpret s the murid's  dreams and visions,
reads his thoughts , and thus follows every movemen t of his consciou s
and subconsciou s life. In the first centurie s of the Sufi movemen t
the idea was already being expresse d that in the hands of the master
the murld  should be as passive as a corpse in the hands of an un-
dertaker. Ghazzali , the main representativ e of moderat e Sufism in
the late elevent h century , also maintaine d that complet e and abso-
lute obedienc e is necessary , even if the sheikh should be wrong:
"Let him know that the advantag e he gains from the error of his

--- Page 127 ---
104 / THE pATH
sheikh, if he should err, is greater than the advantag e he gains from
his own Tightness , if he should be right." 3 This attitude in later
times lent itself to dangerou s consequences ; indeed, it is one of the
reasons fo r modernis t Muslims ' aversion to Sufism. But the original
intent wa s genuine : the master should act like a physician , diag-
nosing an d healing the illnesses and defects of the human soul.
The imag e of the master (who is often identifie d with the true mysti-
cal beloved ) as the physicia n who cures the lover's heart occurs
frequently i n Persian poetry throughou t the centuries .
Visiting hi s master is a religious duty of the disciple (N 115),
for he will find from him what he will not find elsewhere . And to
serve a master is the highest honor of which a disciple can boast-
even if it were only that he "cleane d Junayd' s latrines for thirty
years" (N 222). Even to have met a leading sheikh at once endows
a man with a higher rank (N 115).
Under th e guidanc e of such a trusted master, the murid could
hope to proceed in the stations on the Path. The sheikh would
teach him how to behave in each mental state and prescrib e periods
of seclusion , if he deemed it necessary . It was well known that the
methods coul d not be alike for everybody , and the genuine mystical
leader had to have a great deal of psychologica l understandin g in
order to recogniz e the differen t talents and character s of his murids
and train them accordingly. 4 He might exempt a disciple for a time
from the forty-day seclusion , for instance , because he was spirituall y
too weak, or because his spiritual ecstasy might overwhel m him.
The isolatio n of the murid for a period of forty days necessitate s
a deep change in consciousness , and some of the Sufi theoretician s
were aware—a s every good sheikh in fact was—tha t the seclusio n
might constitute , for weaker adepts, a source of danger rather than
of elevation . If he were to concentrat e too much upon himself
rather tha n upon God, or if passions might overcom e him and
make him nervou s and angry, it might be better to have him live
in the compan y of other people for his spiritual training 5 because
of the mutual influence and good exampl e (L 207).
Generally, th e disciple should conside r the dark room in which
3. Hamilto n A. R. Gibb, Mohammedanism:  An Historical  Survey (London , 1949), p.
150.
4. See Shihabuddin cUmar as-Suhrawardi, cAwdrif al-macdrif (Printed at the
margin of
 Ghazzali' s Ihya.- 3, Bulaq, 1289 h./1872-73) , chaps. 26-28.
5. Suflname,  p. 108.

--- Page 128 ---
THE PATH / 105
he observe s his seclusio n as a tomb, and his frock as a shroud (N
418). Mystic s would often retire into seclusio n for periods of medi-
tation an d were praised if, at the time of their death, they had
completed thirt y or forty chilla. Sometime s they would construc t
a special chillakhana,  a room for seclusion , which might even be
subterranean ( N 325), close to the center of the fraternit y or in a
blessed plac e nearby.
The mystica l path has sometime s been describe d as a ladder, a
staircase tha t leads to heaven, on which the sdlik slowly and pa-
tiently climb s toward higher levels of experience . But the Muslim
mystics kne w that there is another way of reaching higher experi-
ences: it is the jadhba,  "attraction, " by which a person can be
exalted, i n one single spiritua l experience , into a state of ecstasy
and of perfect union. However , it seems typical that the name of
majdhub, "th e attracted one," was usually given to people who were
mentally derange d and who were, in a sense, thrown out of the way
of normal behavio r by the overwhelmin g shock of an "unveiling. "
The source s often describe d such "attracted " people, who are
completely los t and submerge d in the divine unity, their eyes "like
two cups filled with blood" (N 479), inspiring awe, and at times
shocking peopl e by their behavior .
One shoul d not forget, too, that certain Sufis claimed to be
traveling th e Path withou t formal initiation . They were called
uwaysi, recallin g the Prophet' s contemporar y Uways al-Qaran i in
Yemen. Bu t even in his case, some legally inclined mystics would
hold that he was "spiritually " initiated by the Prophet despite the
distance, fo r initiatio n by a nonvisibl e master or by a saint who had
died long ago was considere d possible in Sufi circles. Thus, Kha-
raqani wa s introduce d into the Path through the spirit of Bayezld
BistamI, whil e cAttar was inspired by Hallaj's spirit. The spirit of
the saint is thought to be alive, able to participat e actively in the
affairs of this world, often appearin g in dreams and guiding the
wayfarer o n his Path, for "the friends of God do not die." Later
Sufis—particularly th e Naqshbandiyya—practice d a concentratio n
upon the "spiritua l reality" of the great masters in order to be
strengthened i n their mystica l pursuits.
A final possibilit y of initiatio n from a source other than a human
master wa s through Khidr. Khidr, identifie d with the mysteriou s
companion o f Moses mentione d in Sura 18, is the patron saint of

--- Page 129 ---
106 / THE PATH
travelers, th e immorta l who drank from the water of life. Sometime s
the mystic s would meet him on their journeys ; he would inspire
them, answe r their questions , rescue them from danger , and, in
special cases , invest them with the khirqa,  which was accepted as
valid in the tradition of Sufi initiation . Thus they were connecte d
immediately wit h the highest source of mystica l inspiration . Ibn
cArabi, th e theosophis t (d. 1240), is one of those who claimed to
have receive d the khirqa from Khidr.
The mystica l Path is long and hard for the murld and require s
constant obedienc e and struggle . The correct initial orientatio n
of the adept is decisive for the success of the journey : who begins
in God will also end in Him (L 241). Under the spell of some
poetical utterance s of later Persian poets, or impresse d by dervishes ,
who were anythin g but observan t of Muslim law, westerner s have
often regarded
 the Sufis as representative s of a movemen t that has
freed itsel f from the legal prescription s of Islam, no longer caring
for religio n and infidelity . Sufi became almost an equivalen t for
"free thinker " with many Europeans .
That is, however , not correct. One should not forget that the
shanca, as proclaime d in the Koran and exemplifie d by the Proph-
et (L 27), together with a firm belief in the Day of Judgment , was
the soil out of which their piety grew. They did not abolish the rites
but rather interiorize d them, as it was said: "The people who know
God best are those who struggle most for His command s and follow
closest the traditio n of His Prophet " (N 117). The performanc e of
ritual prayer , fasting, and pilgrimag e to Mecca constituted , for the
majority o f the early Sufis, the minima l religious obligatio n with-
out whic h all possible mystica l training would be useless and
meaningless. Man y of them performe d the pilgrimag e to Mecca
frequently—up t o seventy times, if we can believe the hagiogra -
phers. The y knew that the true seat of the divine spirit was not the
Kaaba mad e of stone but the Kaaba of the faithful worshiper' s
heart (U 43), in which God might reveal Himself to those who
completed th e Path.
When you seek God, seek Him in your heart-
He is not in Jerusalem , nor in Mecca nor in the hajj,
says Yunu s Emre (Y 520), voicing the convictio n of many of his
contemporaries an d followers . Yet the pilgrimag e remaine d a
central poin t in the Sufi life, and Mecca was not only a place where

--- Page 130 ---
THE PATH / 1O7
the Sufis would meet and join in discussion , but where many of
them wer e blessed with revelation s and illuminations .
The recitatio n of the Koran was another importan t duty of the
mystic: "A disciple who does not know the Koran by heart is like
a lemon without scent" (N 131). The divine word is the infallibl e
source of spiritua l uplifting ; it inspires joy and awe and leads to
secret conversation s with God, for "God reveals Himself to His
servants in the Koran," as CAH reportedl y said (B 584).
Even thoug h Paradise and Hell did not matter to the devotee s of
mystical love , they were well aware that their deeds would bear
fruit, and one of the favorite sayings attribute d to the Prophet was
constantly repeate d by the moderat e mystics : "This world is the
seedbed fo r the Otherworld. " Every act bears fruit by helping or
hindering th e adept in his progress toward his goal, and "if you
plant colocynth , no sugarcan e will grow out of it" (D 1337).
An interestin g variatio n of the hadlth just quoted is found in the
Persian mystica l tradition . Rumi, followin g Sanaa's example , held
that every thought that becomes embedde d in the heart will turn
into a form visible to everybod y at the Day of Judgment , just as
the though t of the architec t become s visible in the plan of the
house, or as the plant grows out of the seed hidden in the soil (M
5:1791-1803), an d death will meet man like a mirror, which shows
either a beautiful or an ugly face accordin g to his good or evil deeds.
The Zoroastria n idea of the witness in Heaven who meets the
deceased sou l has clearly inspired these ideas. SanaDI went even
further—he though t that evil thoughts might completel y transfor m
man at the end of time so that some people might even appear as
animals becaus e they followe d bestial instinct s and animal lusts
in their lifetime (SD 618).
One has to work day and night,
to plough and to clean the field of the soul.
(U 264)
And wha t has been sown during the winter—i n the darknes s of
this materia l world—wil l be apparen t in the springtim e of eternity
(M 5:1801) .
In this constan t watchin g over one's actions and thoughts , the
greatest dange r is that the adept may neglect , for a moment, his
spiritual dutie s (ghaftat),  that he may become entrance d by the
"sleep of heedlessness, " as later poets liked to call this state. The

--- Page 131 ---
108 / THE PATH
story of Sassui, the loving wife who found that her husband had
been carrie d away from her while she was asleep, is (in later Sindhi
poetry) a perfect illustratio n of the sleep of heedlessnes s and negli-
gence tha t deprives the soul of the compan y of its Lord and beloved .
And whil e the ordinar y believe r repents his sins, the elite repents
heedlessness ( L 44).
The adep t should turn with his whole being toward God—ikh-
las, "absolut e sincerity, " and giving up selfish thought s in the
service of God are the basic duties of every mystic. A prayer without
ikhlas is of no avail; a religious thought that is not born out of this
sincerity i s meaningless , even dangerous . Praise and blame of the
crowd do not mean anythin g to one who has turned wholly and
without an y qualificatio n to the Lord; and though he will constant -
ly be acting virtuously , he will forget his good and pious actions in
his attemp t to act solely for God. He forgets, of necessity , the
thought o f recompens e for his works in this world and the world
to come.
It is told that Warraq, one of the early Sufis, was seen wearing a long coat
on which he had written the letter kh on one side, the letter m on the
other side, so that he could always remembe r the kh of ikhlas and the m
otmuruwwa, "virtue. " (N 125)
An act of perfect sincerity , done for God's sake, might result in
spiritual progres s even though it might appear outwardl y foolish.
Typical is the story of a not very bright murld whom some mischievou s
people teased , telling him that he would gain spiritua l enlightenmen t
by hangin g himself by his feet from the roof and repeatin g some mean-
ingless word s they taught him. He followed their advice in sincerity and
found himsel f illuminate d the next morning . (N 320)
An overstressin g of the ideal of ikhlas has led to the attitude of
the maldmatiyya,  "those who are blamed, " those who conceal their
virtuous deed s in order to perform their religiou s duties without
ostentation (se e chapter 2). For the greatest sin is riyd, "hypocrisy "
or "ostentation, " and the master of psychologica l analysis in early
Sufism, Muhasibi , dealt extensivel y with this danger. Sufi texts tell
many storie s about people whose hypocris y was revealed , and they
were put to shame. A famous exampl e is this:
A man ostentatiousl y prayed the whole night through in a mosque he
had entere d at dusk and where he had heard a sound that seemed to in-
dicate the presence of a human being. But when the call for morning
prayer wa s heard, he discovere d that his companio n in the mosque was a
dog, thus renderin g all his prayers invalid and himself impure.

--- Page 132 ---
THE PAT H / ICQ
STATIONS AN D STAGE S
The first statio n on the Path, or rather its very beginning ,
is tauba, "repentance" ; tauba means to turn away from sins, to ab-
jure ever y worldly concern. 6 As the poet says:
Repentance i s a strange mount -
it jumps towards heaven in a single moment from the
lowest place .
(M 6:464 )
Tauba ca n be awakene d in the soul by any outwar d event, be it a
profane word , which is suddenl y understoo d in a religious sense,
a piece of paper on which a relevant sentence is written, the recita-
tion of the Koran, a dream, or a meeting with a saintly person.
One of the several stories about Ibrahim ibn Adham' s conversio n
is particularl y well known:
One night , he heard a strange sound on the roof of his palace in Balkh.
The servant s found a man who claimed , in Ibrahim' s presence , to be
looking fo r his lost camel on the palace roof. Blamed by the prince for
having undertake n such an impossibl e task, the man answere d that his,
Ibrahim's, attemp t at attaining heavenly peace and true religiou s life in
the midst of luxury was as absurd as the search for a camel on top of a
roof. Ibrahi m repente d and repudiate d all his possessions . (Cf. M
6:82gff.)
The "world " was considere d a dangerou s snare on the way to
God, and particularl y in the time of the old ascetics harsh, crud e
words wer e uttered to describ e the characte r of this miserabl e
place, whic h was compare d to a latrine— a place to be visited only
in case of need 7—to a rotting carcass, or to a dunghill : "The world
is a dunghill and a gathering place of dogs; and meaner than a dog
is that person who does not stay away from it. For the dog takes
his own need from it and goes away, but he who loves it is in no
way separate d from it" (N 65). Most of the Sufis, however , would
speak of the transitorines s of the world rather than of its perfect
evil; for it was created by God, but it is perishabl e since nothing
but God is everlasting . Why should the ascetic bother about it at
6. See Ignaz Goldziher , "Arabisch e Synonymi k der Askese, " Der Islam 8 (1918), a
study of the technica l terms of early Sufism.
7. Abu Talib al-Makkl , Qut al-qulub ft mu'amalat  al-mahbub,  2 vols. (Cairo, 1310
h./1892—93), 1:244 . Andrae, in In the Garden of Myrtles, however , proves that Ibrahim
was of Arab descent .

--- Page 133 ---
HO / THE PATH
all, since compare d to the glory of God, the world is nothing more
than a gnat's wing (A 10:84)?
When the disciple leaves this world in his act of repentance , the
problem arise s as to whether or not he should remembe r his former
sins. Sahl at-Tustar l demands that even after repentanc e sins should
never be forgotte n (L 43), for remembranc e constitute s a remedy
against possibl e spiritua l pride. Howeve r Junayd , his contempo -
rary, denne d true repentanc e as "the forgettin g of one's sins" (L 43),
and Junayd' s colleagu e Ruwaym defined tauba as "repentin g from
repentance," i.e. , complete obliteratio n of the thought of sin and
penitence. Junayd' s idea is taken up by Hujwiri : "The peniten t
is a lover of God, and the lover of God is in contemplatio n of God:
in contemplatio n it is wrong to remembe r sin, for recollectio n of
sin is a veil between God and the contemplator " (H 296).
In keeping with his inclinatio n to systematization , Hujwiri speaks
of tauba as return from great sins to obedience ; indba is the return
from mino r sins to love, and auba the return from one's self to
God (H 295). This tripartitio n is not found elsewhere .
The Sufis knew how often "repentanc e was broken"—a n expres-
sion connected , in later Persian poetry, with the breakin g of the
wine bottle , which induced people to sin again and require d re-
newed repentance . But the mystica l leaders were sure that the door
of repentanc e remains open; it is
a door from the West until the day
when the sun rises in the West
(M 4:2504 )
i.e., until Doomsday , says Rumi, on whose mausoleu m in Konya
the famou s lines are written:
Come back , come back, even if you have broken
your repentanc e a thousand times.
In the primary stages of the Path, the adept has to increase in
abstinence (wara c), caused by fear of the Lord, and in renunciatio n
(zuhd). Th e latter word means, again in the traditiona l tripartit e
arrangement o f concepts , to give up whateve r is ritually and re-
ligiously allowed , to give up this world, and eventuall y to give up
everything tha t distracts the heart from God, even to renounc e the
thought o f renunciation . That includes , of course, giving up the
hope for heavenl y reward or the fear of Hell.

--- Page 134 ---
THE PATH / 111
It was easy for the ascetic to renounc e things declared doubtfu l
by Musli m law; but the tendenc y to renounc e even things con-
sidered lawfu l by the communit y of the faithful sometime s reached
absurd degrees . Pious women would not spin in the light of a
neighbor's candle ; a mystic whose only sheep had grazed on some-
one else's lawn by mistake would no longer drink its milk, declaring
it to be illicit for him after such a transgression . Food or anythin g
belonging t o or coming from the ruling classes was regarded as
suspect. It is well known that in the old days the most pious scholars
refused to accept governmen t offices; even in later periods relation s
between th e Sufis and the rulers were often cold, if not strained ,
since the mystics were not intereste d in any contact that might
pollute thei r pure intentions . That is why in anecdote s and in
poetry, an d so often in cAttar's epics , the dervish is made the
mouthpiece o f social criticism : he puts his finger on the wound of
society an d points to the corrupt state of affairs.
For the early consideration s of renunciatio n and "eating the
licit," a seemingl y characteristi c story is told by Hujwlr l in con-
nection wit h the problem of whether or not a mystic should be a
celibate (whic h he advocates) ; but the anecdot e shows even better
the exaggerate d zuhd and the punishmen t that follows a single
moment o f heedlessness :
One day, when Ahmad ibn Harb was sitting with the chiefs and nobles
of Nishapu r who had come to offer their respects to him, his son entered
the room, drunk, playing a guitar, and singing , and passed insolentl y
without heedin g them. Ahmad, perceivin g that they were put out of
countenance, sai d "What is the matter? " They replied: "We are ashamed
that this lad should pass by you in such a state." Ahmad said: "He is ex-
cusable. On e night my wife and I partook of some food that was brought
to us from a neighbour' s house. That same night this son was begotten
and we fell asleep and let our devotion s go. Next morning we inquire d
of our neighbou r as to the source of the food that he had sent to us, ana
we found that it came from a wedding-feas t in the house of a governmen t
official. (H 365)
In later Sufi texts stress is laid not so much on zuhd as on its negative
counterpart, hirs,  "greed," a quality opposed to both renunciatio n
and true poverty . The Persian poets have never ceased warnin g
their reader s of greed, which is "a dragon and not any small thing"
(M 5:120) . This quality was found, as history shows, not only in
the worldl y leaders but also in many of those who claimed to have
attained th e highest spiritua l rank and who used outward zuhd
to cover their inner greed. The zdhid-i zdhirparast,  the ascetic who

--- Page 135 ---
112 / THE PATH
still worship s outward things, i.e., who has not reached sincere
selflessness an d loving surrender , has been ridicule d in many
Persian poems .
The forwar d movemen t on the Path, as initiated by repentanc e
and renunciation , consists of a constant struggle against the nafs,
the "soul"—th e lower self, the base instincts , what we might render
in the biblical sense as "the flesh." The faithful had been admon-
ished in the Koran (Sura 79:40) to "fear the place of his Lord and
hinder the nafs from lust." For the nafs is the cause of blameworth y
actions, sins , and base qualities ; and the struggle with it has been
called by the Sufis "the greater Holy War," for "the worst enemy
you have is [the nafs] between your sides," as the hadith says (L 12).
The Korani c expressio n an-nafs al-ammdra  bfs-su*, "the soul com-
manding t o evil" (Sura 12:53) forms the starting point for the Sufi
way of purification . The holy book contain s also the expressio n
an-nafs al-lawwama,  "the blamin g soul" (Sura 75:2), which cor-
responds approximatel y to the conscienc e that watches over man's
actions an d controls him. Eventually , once purificatio n is achieved ,
the nafs may become mutma^inna (Sura 89:27), "at peace"; in this
state, according
 to the Koran, it is called home to its Lord. 8
The main duty of the adept is to act exactly contrary to the nafs's
appetites an d wishes. There is nothing more dangerou s for the
disciple tha n to treat the nafs lightly by allowin g indulgence s and
accepting (facilitating ) interpretations , says Ibn Khafif. 9 It is in-
cumbent upo n every traveler on the Path to purge the nafs of its
evil attribute s in order to replace these by the opposite , praise-
worthy qualities . Sufi hagiograph y is full of stories about the ways
in which the masters of the past tamed their appetite s and, if they
failed, the manner of their punishment .
The nafs is somethin g very real, and many stories tell of its having
been seen outside the body. Sometime s it took the form of a black
dog that wanted food but had to be trained and sent away; other
mystics sa w their nafs coming out of their throats in the form of a
young fox or a mouse (H 206). The nafs can also be compare d to
a disobedien t woman who tries to seduce and cheat the poor way-
farer (the noun nafs is feminin e in Arabic!) . A recurren t image
is that of the restive horse or mule that has to be kept hungry and
8. A. Tahir al-Khanqahl , Guzlda dar akhldq it tasawwuf,  ed. Iraj Afshar (Tehran ,
1347 sh./igGS) , p. 224.
9. cAbdur-Raliman as-Sulami , Kitdb tabaqdt  as-Suftyya,  ed. Xuraddi n Sharlh a
(Cairo, 1953) , p. 465.

--- Page 136 ---
THE PATH / 113
has to undergo constan t mortificatio n and training so that, eventu-
ally, it serves the purpose of bringing the rider to his goal (H 202-
204).10 Sometime s it is likened to a disobedien t camel—Rum l com-
pares the
 struggle of the intellec t with the nafs to the attempt s of
Majnun t o turn his camel in the right direction , toward the tent
of his beloved (M 4:1532)—an d it is only natural that poets all over
the desert areas, like Shah cAbduDl-Latif i n Sind, are particularl y
fond of this comparison . Even the compariso n of the nafs to a pig
is not rare. It is found mainly in cAttar's poetry ; like Sana 3! before
him, he felt that those who obeyed their piglike nature would
themselves b e changed into pigs (U 236-37 ; R 102-3).
Sometimes th e nafs has been likened to Pharaoh , the self-centere d
ruler (U 16; M 4:3621) who did not listen to the call to faith uttered
by Moses but claimed a divine rank for himself and consequentl y
was drowne d in the Red Sea; or to Abraha , who intrude d in the
holy city of Mecca and should be scared away with stones (SD 313;
cf. Sura 105).
Old, popular beliefs were revived when the nafs was said to take
the form
 of a snake; but this serpent can be turned into a useful
rod, just as Moses transforme d serpents into rods. More frequent ,
however, i s the idea that the power of the spiritual master can blind
the snake ; accordin g to folk belief, the snake is blinded by the
sight of an emerald (the connectio n of the pir's spiritual power
with the green color of the emerald is significant) . Thus, his in-
fluence render s the nafs-snake  harmles s (M 3:2548) .
The imag e of training the horse or the dog conveys the most near-
ly accurat e impressio n of the activity of the Sufi: the lower faculties
are not to be killed, but trained so that even they may serve on the
way to God. A story told about the Prophe t Muhamma d well ex-
presses thi s faith in the training of the base soul; the expressio n
used here for the "lower qualities , instincts, " is shaytan,  "Satan":
"When aske d how his shaytan  behaved , he answered : 'Aslama
shaytanl; m y shaytan  has become a Muslim and does whateve r I
order him / " i.e., all his lower faculties and instinct s had been
turned int o useful tools in the service of God. Provided that man
obeys God in every respect, the lower soul will obey its master, as
everything i n the world will obey the one who has completel y sur-
rendered his
 will to the will of God.
10. Annemari e Schimmel , "Nur em storrische s Pferd," in Ex Orbe Religionum
Festschrift Ge o Widengren  (Leiden , 1972).

--- Page 137 ---
114 / THE PATH
The struggl e against the nafs has always been a favorite topic of
the Sufis, and they have never tired of warning their disciple s of
its ruses, not only in the crude forms of sensual appetite s but in
the guise s of hypocris y and false piety, which must be carefull y
observed an d obliterated .
The nafs has a rosary and a Koran in its right hand,
and a scimitar and a dagger in the sleeve,
(M 3:2554 )
says Rumi , taking up a warning formulate d four hundre d years
earlier by Dhu Dn-Nun. Eve n to indulge in constan t acts of worship
or prayer can become a pleasure for the nafs; the mystic, therefore ,
has to break every kind of habit, for otherwis e his nafs will over-
come him in a subtler way (N 98). The "pleasur e derived from
works of obedience " should be avoided (N 83), for that is fatal
poison.
One of the great dangers for the wayfare r is laziness or leisure;
as long as he has not yet reached his goal, it would be better for him
to occupy himself with seemingl y useless things, like digging one
pit after the other (N 156, 90), than to spend a moment in leisure,
for "leisur e (fardgh) is an affliction " (N 90).
The chie f means for taming and training the nafs were, and still
are, fastin g and sleeplessness . The first ascetics have often been de-
scribed a s qcfim al-lail wa sffim ad-dahr,  "spendin g their nights
upright i n prayer and maintainin g a perpetua l fast by day." The
old saying that the three elements o f Sufi conduct are qillat at-ta^dm,
qillat al-mandm  wa qillat al-kaldm,  "little food, little sleep, little
talk" (to which often "loneliness , keeping away from men," was
added) is  still as valid as it was a thousand years ago.
Lack of sleep was considere d one of the most effective means on
the mystica l Path—"th e eye is weeping instead of sleeping" 11—and
the caliph cUmar (634-44) , who was certainl y not a Sufi, reportedl y
said: "Wha t have I to do with sleep? If I slept by day, I would lose
the Muslims , and if I slept by night I would lose my soul" (G 1:318).
The asceti c spent his nights at prayers recommende d in the Koran,
which gav e him time to enjoy blessed conversatio n with his Lord
through prayer . Many of the mystics would avoid stretchin g out
their legs or lying down when slumbe r overcam e them, for all of
11. Muhamma d Glsudaraz , Diwdn anls al-^ushshaq  (n.p., n.d.), p. 18.

--- Page 138 ---
THE PATH / 115
them hope d for some revelatio n after the long nights of sleepless -
ness, whic h extende d over years, if we can believe the sources. The
most beautifu l story pertainin g to this attitude has been told and
retold for centuries : Shah Kirman l did not sleep for forty years,
but eventuall y he was overwhelme d by sleep—an d he saw God.
Then he exclaimed : " 'O Lord, I was seeking Thee in nightly vigils,
but I have found Thee in sleep.' God answered : 'O Shah, you have
found M e by means of those nightly vigils: if you had not sought
Me there , you would not have found Me here' " (H 138). These
ascetics and  Sufis were hoping—a s later poets have expresse d it so
excellently—to hav e the vision of a sun that is neither from east
nor from west but rises at midnight , and thus to enjoy a spiritual
enlightenment no t comparabl e to any worldly light (cf. U 160).
For practica l purposes , however , the qillat at-tcfam, "to eat little,"
is even more importan t than to avoid sleep. The Sufis would fast
frequently, i f not constantly . Many of them extende d the fasting
in Ramada n observe d by every Muslim ; but in order to make fast-
ing more difficult , they invente d the so-calle d saum dffudl, which
meant tha t they would eat one day and fast one day, so that their
bodies woul d not become accustome d to either of the two states.
"Fasting i s really abstinence , and this include s the whole method
of Sufism " (H 321).
The first mystic to speak of the "alchem y of hunger" was, as far
as we can see, Shaqiq al-Balkh i from the Khurasania n ascetic school.
He claime d that forty days of constan t hunger could transfor m
the darknes s of the heart into light (W 216), and many sayings of
the early Sufis praise this hunger , which "is stored up in treasure -
houses wit h Him, and He gives it to none but whom He particular -
ly loves" (L 202). "Hunger is God's food by which He quicken s the
bodies of the upright " (M 5:1756) , says Ruml, who also argues
that, just as the host brings better food when the guest eats little,
God bring s better, i.e., spiritual , food to those who fast. But "hun-
ger is the food of the ascetics , recollectio n that of the gnostics "
(N 157).
The account s of the extende d period s of fasting of Muslim
mystics ar e astounding , and we have little reason to doubt their
authenticity. Th e wish to die in the state of fasting may induce
the Sufi even to throw away the wet piece of cotton that his
friends pu t in his mouth to relieve him in his state of agony (N

--- Page 139 ---
Il6 / THE PATH
245). It would be worth investigatin g to what extent this restrictio n
to extremel y small quantitie s of food contribute d to the longevit y
of the Sufis. It is astonishin g how many of them lived to be very old.
Like the early Christia n monks who lived exclusivel y on the host,
the Musli m saints considere d hunger the best way to reach spiritu-
ality. To be empty of worldly food is the preconditio n for enlight-
enment. "Coul d the reedflut e sing if its stomac h were filled?" Rumi
asks repeatedly . Man can receive the divine breath of inspiratio n
only whe n he keeps himself hungry an d empty.
Ruzbihan Baql l tells about a saint who totally fasted for seventy
days, durin g which he remaine d in the contemplatio n of samadiyyat,
"eternity": "I n this state food comes to him from the word 'I stay
with my Lord who feeds me and gives me to drink' " (Sura 26:79).
"This is no longer the station of struggle , but that of contempla -
tion" (B 364). In cases of this kind, hunger is no longer a means for
subduing th e nafs but a divine grace: adoratio n is the food for the
spiritual ma n (H 303), and the Sufi is nourishe d by the divine light
(M 4:1640-44) . Some mystics , like Ibn Khafif, have confesse d that
their goa l in permanen t fasting and diminishin g their food was
to be like the angels, who also live on perpetua l adoratio n (X 107).
Gabriel's foo d was not from the kitchen ,
it was from the vision of the Creator of Existence .
Likewise thi s food of the men of God
is from God, not from food and dish.
(M 3:6-7 )
And why care for the body, which is, as the Sufis liked to say, only
"a morsel for the tomb" and should therefor e be bony and lean
(D 777)?
Some of the ascetics exaggerate d fasting and hunger in the pre-
paratory stage s to such an extent that one can almost speak of an
"idolatry o f the empty stomach " (W 216). There are known cases
of Sufis who starved to death (L 417). Others not only fasted and
restricted thei r diet to the absolut e minimu m but, in additio n to
that, took a purgative on every third day. 12
Yet the great masters have always acknowledge d that hunger is
only a means to spiritua l progress , not a goal in itself. Just as Abu
Sacid ibn Abfl-Khair , after years of incredibl e ascetic hardships ,
eventually enjoye d food—an d good food!—man y of the later mystics
12. Umar Muhamma d Daudpota , Kaldm-i  Girhorl  (Hyderabad , Sind, 1956), p. 23.

--- Page 140 ---
THE PATH / 117
would agre e that "the soul-do g is better when its mouth is shut by
throwing a  morsel into it."13
Strangely enough , as early as the tenth century , the fondnes s of
the Sufis for halvah, sweetmeat , is mentioned ; and in the eleventh
and later centurie s poets often speak in derogator y terms of the
Sufi with milk-whit e hair who has made the recollectio n (dhikr]
of sugar, rice, and milk his special litany (SD 149). This derogator y
attitude is echoed in the poetry of Bedil (d. 1721), who criticize d
the Sufis whose only dhikr, recollection , is to constantl y mention
food. And Muhamma d Iqbal (d. 1938) made the fake murld ex-
plain that God, though "closer than the jugular vein" (Sura 50:16),
is not closer to man than his stomach .
Many late r orders taught that the middle way, between excessiv e
hunger an d excessiv e eating, was safest for the disciple' s progress
(N 395). Accordin g to the later Naqshbandiyy a and other moderat e
orders, th e people who truly fast are those who keep their minds
free from the food of satanic suggestion s and so do not allow any
impure thought s to enter their hearts: "Such people' s sleep is
worship. Thei r walking and going and resting are glorificatio n of
God, and their breathin g praise of God."
One of the most importan t stations on the Path is tawakkul,
complete trus t in God and self-surrende r to Him. The Swiss
scholar Benedik t Reinert has devoted to this subject a book that
must be regarde d as a model for future research into the concept s
of early Sufism. 14 The definitio n of tawakkul  is of central impor-
tance for an understandin g of classical Sufi thought . Darani, the
spiritual descendan t of Hasan al-Basri , defined it as the apex of
zuhd, "renunciation. " The problem was soon posed as to whethe r
tawakkul wa s an attribute of the faithful or a consequenc e of perfect
faith. Thu s Muhasibi , representativ e of orthodo x views, holds that
the degree of tawakkul  can vary in accordanc e with the degree of
faith a person has. Throughou t the ninth century—probabl y be-
ginning wit h Shaqiq al-Balkhi—th e pious discusse d the differen t
aspects of this attitude , which Dhu Dn-Nun define d as "complet e
certitude." Accordin g to these definitions , real tauhid demand s
tawakkul: God , in His absoluteness , is the only actor, and there-
fore man has to rely completel y upon Him. Or, to define it different -
13. Dara Shikoh , Sakinat al-auliycP,  ed. M. Jalali Na^ini (Tehran , 1334 sh./igGs) ,
p. 238.
14. Benedik t Reinert , Die Lehre vom tawakkul  in der dlteren Sufik (Berlin , 1968),
an excellen t study of the developmen t of "trust in God" and its ramifications .

--- Page 141 ---
Il8 / THE PATH
ly: since the divine power is all-embracing , man must have complet e
trust in this power.
The same end is reached if the problem is approache d from the
angle of predestination . Rizq, "our daily bread," has been guaran-
teed from preeternity . Why worry, then? Is not one of God's names,
ar-Razzdq, "H e who bestows sustenance" ? And He has shown His
kindness t o every being from his birth, even from the moment of
conception, b y nourishin g him first with blood, then with milk.
Since everythin g is created by and belongs to God, man possesse s
absolutely nothin g of his own; therefor e it would be vain to strive
to attract or refuse anything . The Muslim creed expressl y states
that "wha t has been destined for man cannot possibly miss him,"
be it food, happiness , or death.
The overwhelmin g feeling of God's all-encompassin g wisdom ,
power, an d loving-kindnes s is reflected in the Muslim traditio n as
fully as in some of the Psalms and in the Christia n tradition . The
word ascribe d to the Prophet , "if ye had trust in God as ye ought
He would feed you even as He feeds the birds," sounds almost
evangelical. Thi s deep trust in God's promise to feed man and
bring him up, as it develope d out of the Koranic teaching , has
permeated Musli m life. SanaDI said about 1120:
If your daily bread is in China,
the horse of acquisitio n is already saddled ,
and either brings you hurriedl y to it,
or brings it to you, while you are asleep.
(S 106)
And even today Muslim intellectual s may say: "Whereve r your
rizq is, there you will find it, and it will find you."
The Musli m mystics often use the expressio n husn az-zann, "to
think wel l of God," which may sound strange to modern ears, but
which mean s once more the absolute , hopeful trust in God's kind-
ness. God definitel y knows what is good for man and gives bread and
death, punishmen t and forgivenes s accordin g to His eternal wis-
dom. Thi s attitude has been a source of strength for millions of
Muslims, bu t it is not to be confuse d with the stoic acceptanc e of
a blind fate, as it is usually understoo d in terms of predestinaria n
ideas. The faith in the rizq that will reach man was certainly carried
too far by an early mystic who forbade his disciple to stretch out
his hand to grasp a dried-up melon skin.

--- Page 142 ---
THE PATH / lig
Tawakkul i n its interiorize d sense means to realize tauhld; for
it would be shirk khafi, "hidden associationism, " to rely upon or
be afraid of any created being. This aspect of tawakkul  is one of the
basic truths i n Sufi psychology : as soon as every feeling and thought
is directed in perfect sincerity toward God, without any secondar y
causes, neithe r humans nor animals can any longer harm the mystic.
Thus tawakkul  results in perfect inner peace. The numerou s stories
about Sufi s who wandere d "in tawakkul"  through the desert with-
out fear of lions or highway robbers, without any provisions , reflect
this attitud e in a somewha t romantic fashion. Ironically , one of the
leading master s of tawakkul,  Abu Turab an-Nakhshabi , was de-
voured by lions in the desert (Q 17).
But exaggerate d tawakkul  might induce man into perfect pas-
sivity. The n it might produce strange figures like the dervish who
fell into the Tigris; asked whether he wanted to be saved, he said
"no," and asked whether he would rather die, he again said "no"—
"for what have I to do with willing? " God had decreed at the time
of creatio n whethe r he was to be drowned or saved. Another story
that deals with the unhealth y exaggeratio n of tawakkul  is told about
Ibrahim ib n al-Khawass , an Iraqian Sufi who used to wander in the
deserts withou t any provision s ^alcft-tawakkul}.  But a colleague of
his though t even this too lax, since "his Sufi dress begged for him";
he made him wear luxuriou s attire and then sent him to the desert
to practice real trust in God (X 105). This same wayfare r would re-
fuse the compan y of Khidr, the patron of pious travelers , because
his gracefu l compan y seemed to negate his perfect trust in God
alone—had no t Abraham , after all, refused help even from Gabrie l
when Nimro d cast him onto the blazing pyre? And he was rewarde d
for this act of tawakkul  by God's changin g the fire into a cool rose
garden. How , then, could the Sufi ascetic even think of danger if
everything wa s in the hands of God? And why should he get in-
volved in a professio n to gain his livelihoo d if God would send him
his food in any case, if there was food predestine d for him?
The asceti c regarde d everythin g worldly as contaminated ; noth-
ing was ritually clean enough for him to occupy himself with. He
would rathe r spend his days and nights in worship than pollute him-
self by "practical " work. And even if he did work, why should he try
to gain more than was needed just for one day? To store money or
goods was regarded as a major sin—did the pious know whethe r he
would stil l be alive within an hour, or by the next morning ? "Ex-

--- Page 143 ---
ISO / THE PATH
tension of hope," tul al-amal, is one of the most disliked attitude s in
Sufism; Ghazzali' s chapter on "Fear and Hope," in his Ihya*  culum
ad-din, echoe s these feelings and gives a lucid picture of the austere
outlook o f early Sufism. Even mystics who cannot be regarded as
typical representative s of strict tawakkul  often distribute d all their
money in the evening or gave away everythin g they had on Friday.
They also refused any medical treatment .
The importanc e of the problem of tawakkul  for early Sufi
thought an d practice can be understoo d from the fact that the earli-
est standar d work on mysticism , Abu Talib al-Makki' s Qut al-qulub,
contains sixt y pages (big folio with very small print) about this topic,
more than about any other aspect of Sufism. Through Ghazzali , who
drew heavil y upon Makki's book, these ideas became widely known
in medieva l Islam. However , neither strict Hanbalit e orthodox y
nor the moderat e Sufis accepted the notion of tawakkul  in an over-
stressed form ; exaggeration s like those just mentione d were criti-
cized by many of the leading pious. They considere d this exag-
gerated attitud e a violation of the Propheti c tradition—di d not
Muhammad himsel f advise a bedouin: "First tie your camel's knee,
and then trust in God"? Sahl at-Tustar i is the perfect example of a
mystic wh o tried to combin e a life in the "world" with complet e
tawakkul, an d his contemporar y Junayd taught his disciples how to
regard earning : "The proper method of earning ... is to engage in
works whic h bring one nearer to God, and to occupy oneself with
them in the same spirit as with works of supererogatio n commende d
to one, not with the idea that they are a means of sustenanc e or ad-
vantage" ( K 73).
In the course of time, tawakkul  came to be regarded more as a
spiritual attitud e than as an externa l practice . If everybod y had
lived accordin g to the ideals promote d by some of the early ascetics,
the whole economi c and social fabric of the Muslim Empire would
have collapsed . However , as a basic station on the mystica l Path and
as a spiritual force, an unshakabl e trust in divine wisdom and
power, tawakkul  is still an importan t element of Muslim piety.
The centra l attitude in Sufi life is that of faqr, "poverty. " The
Koran (Sur a 35:16) has contraste d man in need of God with God,
the ever Rich, the Self-sufficient , and here lies one of the roots of the
Sufi concep t of poverty. In fact, the main names under which the
mystics hav e been known in the West—thoug h often in distorte d

--- Page 144 ---
THE PATH / 121
images—are faqir,  "poor," and dervish , "poor, mendicant. " Pov-
erty was an attribut e of the Prophet , who claimed , accordin g to
the tradition , faqrt fakhri, "poverty is my pride." There are numer-
ous legend s about the destitut e state and the poverty of his house-
hold and the member s of his family.
The Sufis considere d outwar d poverty a necessary station at the
beginning o f the Path, and they tried to preserve it as long as possi-
ble, often throughou t their lives. There is no reason to doubt the
validity of  the stories in which the utter destitutio n of some of the
great mystic s is dramaticall y described . The reed mat on which the
mystic slept , and which often constitute d his only worldly posses-
sion, becam e in later Persian poetry a symbol of spiritual wealth,
since it gives its owner a rank higher than that of Solomon on his
air-borne throne :
Everyone wh o has to write the manuscrip t of the
etiquette o f Poverty
puts a ruler from the strips of the reed-ma t on the pages
of his body. 15
Poverty interprete d in a spiritual sense means the absence of de-
sire for wealth, which includes the absence of desire for the blessing s
of the otherworld . One of the aspects of true faqr is that the mystic
must not ask anythin g of anyone—Ansari , though utterly poor,
never aske d his wealthy friends even for a blanket, though he knew
that they would have wanted to give him one, but "since they did
not perceiv e my misery, why ask them?" (N 347). For to ask would
mean to rely upon a created being, and to receive would burden the
soul with gratitud e toward the giver, a burden that was considere d
most embarrassin g and heavy; both in poetry and in everyda y speech
this feelin g of minnat,  "gratitude, " has a negative value for the
faithful.
If man has no wish for himself in this world and the next, then he
may be called a genuine faqir (N 111). To possess anything means
to be possesse d by it—the world enthrall s those who possess some of
its goods, whereas "the true faqir should not possess anything and
thus not be possesse d by anything " (L 108). He needs God, nothing
else.
15. Abu Talib Kallm, Dlwdn, ed. Partaw Baida 3! (Tehran , 1336 sh./ig57) , ghazal
no. 316.

--- Page 145 ---
122 / THE PATH
Later Sufi s have stretched this concept of absolute poverty so far
that even Jesus, the ideal of poverty for the early ascetics, was re-
garded as imperfec t in his poverty; he used to carry a needle with
him, whic h proved that his relation with the world was not yet com-
pletely severed , and that is why he was assigned a place only in the
fourth heaven , not in the proximit y of the Lord. This story belongs
among th e favorite s of Persian poets in their praise of poverty (cf.
SD 85).
Hujwiri spoke , correctly , about the form and the essence of pov-
erty: "Its form is destitutio n and indigence , but its essence is for-
tune and free choice" (H 19). The dervish , the Sufi, may be rich if
he has the right attitude , which means that his outward wealth and
power are of no interest to him and that he would be willing to give
them up at any moment . The final consequence—afte r quitting
this world and the next—is to "quit quitting " (tark at-tark), to com-
pletely surrende r and forget poverty , surrender , and quitting .
About the year 900, there was discussio n in Baghda d and elsewher e
about the superiorit y of the poor or the rich. Most of the Sufis agreed
that faqr was superior and preferabl e to wealth, provided that it was
combined wit h contentmen t (N 417)—an d this is the general solu-
tion found in later medieva l Sufism, as in Abu Najib as-Suhrawar -
di's Adah al-muridin.
Many of the early sources are filled with praise for the true faqtr
and sometime s equate him with the genuine Sufi. Yet Jami, follow-
ing Abu Hafs cUmar as-Suhrawardi' s distinctio n among "ascetic, "
"poor," an d "Sufi," as explaine d in the cAwdrif al-ma^arif,  regarded
the faqir, in the technica l sense, as inferior to the real Sufi, for whom
faqr is nothing but a station on the Path. If he makes poverty a goal
in itself, the faqir is veiled from God by his very "will to be poor"
(N 11). That is basically an elaboratio n of a saying by Ibn Khafif:
"The Sufi is he whom God has chosen (istafa) for Himself , out of
love, and the faqir is he who purifies himself in his poverty in the
hope of drawing near [to God]" (N 12).
Others hav e praised faqr as the central quality of the mystic, as
Rumi say s in an interestin g comparison :
It is like the highest sheikh, and all the hearts are murids,
the hearts of the lovers turn around it.
(D 890)
Hujwiri ha s describe d this kind of poverty very beautifully :

--- Page 146 ---
THE PATH / 123
Dervishhood i n all its meaning s is a metaphorica l poverty, and amidst
all its subordinat e aspects there is a transcenden t principle . The Divine
mysteries com e and go over the dervish, so that his affairs are acquire d by
himself, hi s actions attribute d to himself, and his ideas attached to him-
self. But when his affairs are freed from the bonds of acquisition , his ac-
tions are no more attribute d to himself. Then he is the Way, not the
wayfarer, i.e. , the dervish is a place over which somethin g is passing,
not a wayfarer followin g his own will. (Hsg)
Faqr, here , is almost equated with fand, "annihilatio n in God,"
which is the goal of the mystic, as Rumi said once in the Mathnawl
(M 5:672) . For cAttar povert y and annihiliatio n constitut e the
seventh an d last vale on the Path leading to God, after the travele r
has traverse d the valleys of search, love, gnosis, independence , tau-
hld, and bewildermen t (MT).
Along thi s line of interpretatio n a phrase was invente d that be-
longs amon g the standar d saying s of later Sufism : al-faqr idhd
tamma huwa  Allah, "when faqr becomes perfect (complete) , it is
God." Th e heart, annihilate d in absolut e poverty , lives in the
eternal richnes s of God, or, rather, absolut e poverty become s abso-
lute richness . That may be what the author of this sentenc e felt. Its
origin is not known . Sometime s it is called a hadlth. It has been
attributed t o Uways al-Qarani , but that is impossible ; Jami (N 267)
ascribes i t to a disciple of KharaqanI , which would be historicall y
possible. Whateve r its source may be, the sentenc e was used fre-
quently amon g the mystics after the elevent h century ; Rumi (D
1948) was fond of it, as was Jami; and the Sufi orders—Qadiriyy a and
Naqshbandiyya—made i t known as far as Malaysia. 16
The equatio n of faqr with annihilation , and the emphasi s on the
negative, nonexisten t aspect of things i s expressed , in Islamic art, by
the large empty hall of the mosque , which inspires the visitor with
numinous grandeur . It is also reflecte d in the negativ e space in the
arabesques o r in calligraphy . Only by absolut e faqr can the created
world becom e a vessel for the manifestation s of God, the eternall y
rich.
There is another Propheti c tradition , however , in which Mu-
hammad claim s that "poverty is the 'blacknes s of face' [i.e., shame]
16. See Hasan Lutfi §usut, Islam tasawufunda  Hacegdn  Hanedant  (Istanbul , 1958),
p. 156; Maulan a cAbdurrahman Jami , LawfPih  (Tehran , 1342 sh./igGg) , no. 8. See
al-Attas, Th e Mysticism  of Hamza al-Fansuri  (Kuala Lumpur , 1970), pp. 46, 226, 462.
An inscriptio n
 from a Qadiriyy a tekke in Konya, dated 1819, in my possession , contains
a Persian quatrai n ending with these words. They are also quoted by the Indo-Persia n
poet Mirz a Bedil (d. 1721), Kulliydt,  4 vols. (Kabul, 1962-65) , 1:1009.

--- Page 147 ---
124 / THE PATH
in both
 worlds." 17 How is one to interpre t this statemen t after so
much prais e of faqr? Baqli saw in it a condemnatio n of the claim to
be a faqir (B 605); but Sana 3! had invente d an ingeniou s interpreta -
tion nearl y a century before him: just as the Negro—proverbiall y
cheerful i n classica l Arabic literature—i s happy and smiling in spite
of his black face, so the true poor person is filled with spiritua l hap-
piness and permanen t joy in his state of poverty (S 88). This sounds
farfetched bu t is a typical example of the art of interpretatio n as
practiced b y the Sufis. It shows, at the same time, the central place
attributed t o the happines s of poverty among the Sufis, who are the
nihil habentes  omnia possedentes.  There is still another interpre -
tation of the "blacknes s of face": perfect poverty is the state of reach-
ing the pure divine essence, which is the Black Light by which one
sees and which itself remains invisible (CL 168, 176)—anothe r inter-
pretation tha t emphasize s the close relation between faqr and fand.
Another statio n on the Path, which has often been described , is
sabr, "patience, " taught by the Koran as the attitude of Job and of
Jacob—"and Go d is with those who show patience " (Sura 2:103).
"Sabr is to remain unmove d before the arrows of the divine de-
crees," say s Muhasib i (W 283). Others would change the words
"divine decrees " into "affliction, " but the meanin g remain s the
same: perfec t patience is to accept whateve r comes from God, even
the hardes t blow of fate. With their tendenc y to classify the stations
and stages , the Sufis divided patient people into three classes: the
mutasabbir, wh o attempt s to be patient; the sdbir, who is patient
in afflictions ; and the sabur, who is perfectly patient under any con-
dition. "T o be patient before God's orders is more excellen t than
fasting an d prayer" (N 164).
The old Arabic saying, "patienc e is the key to happiness, " has
been repeate d thousand s of times by mystics and poets, who never
tired of inventin g new parable s to show the necessit y of patience :
only throug h patienc e does the fruit become sweet; only through
patience ca n the seed survive the long winter and develop into
grain, which , in turn, brings strength to the people, who patientl y
wait for it to be turned into flour and bread. Patience is required to
cross the endless deserts that stretch before the traveler on the Path
and to cross the mountain s that stand, with stone-hearte d breasts,
between hi m and his divine beloved .
17. Al-Khanqahi , Guzlda, p. 17.

--- Page 148 ---
THE PATH / 125
Patience, O  father, is an iron shield,
on which God has written "victory has come."
(M 5:2479 )
Yet patience , indispensabl e as it is, is only "a messenge r from the
divine beloved" —
Patience alway s says: "I give glad tidings from union
with Him. "
Gratitude alway s says: "I am the possesso r of a whole
store from Him!"
(D 2142)
Patience i s an importan t mileston e on the Path, but a person who
has reache d the station of gratitud e (shukr) is already blessed by
divine grace . There is no doubt that gratitud e is superior to pa-
tience; th e problem posed by the Sufis of the old school is only
whether a  patient, poor or a grateful, rich man is closer to God. One
might say that patience is more praiseworth y than gratitude , for
patience goe s against one's body, whereas gratitude conform s to the
body, or that the dichotom y of the two states is resolved in the state
of ridd, "contentment, " which makes man whole.
Gratitude i s divided into differen t ranks: gratitud e for the gift,
gratitude fo r not giving, and gratitud e for the capacity to be grate-
ful. For though the common man deserves to be applaude d when he
expresses hi s gratitude at receiving a gift, the Sufi should give thanks
even if his wish is not fulfilled or a hope is withheld .
A famous story about patience and gratitude , repeated in almost
every boo k about early Sufis, appears in Sanaa's Hadlqa in the fol-
lowing form :
An Iraqia n Sufi visited a sheikh from Khurasa n and asked him about
real Sufis m as taught in his country . He replied that, when God sent
them somethin g they would eat it and be grateful , if not, they would en-
dure patienc e and take the wish out of the heart. Whereupo n the Ira-
qian Sufi replied: "That kind of Sufism is what our dogs do in Iraq—
when the y find a bone they eat it, otherwis e they are patient and leave
it." Being asked by his companio n how he, then, would define Sufism, he
answered: "Whe n we have anythin g we prefer others to ourselve s [i.e.,
give it away], if not, we occupy ourselve s with thanks and pray for for-
giveness." ( S 495)
This story , which has been attribute d to various people, clearly
shows the higher rank of those who offer thanks even when de-
prived of everything . It is reminiscen t of the prayer of Job, the

--- Page 149 ---
126 / THE PATH
great mode l of patience in Christia n and Islamic lore: "The Lord
gave, and the Lord took away; blessed be the name of the Lord."
On the highest level the Sufis understoo d that even the capacity
for thankin g is a divine gift, not a human act (cf. Q 80 ff.), and there-
fore "it behoove s to be grateful for the gratitude " (B 515). The Sufi
who acts in this way has before him the exampl e of the Prophet ,
"who in the highest bliss of being drowne d in the ocean of the
bounty of gratitude wanted to express his thanks in the tongue with-
out tongue s and found himself incapabl e and said Id uhsl thancfan
^alaika, 'I cannot count the praise due to Thee' " (B 514). This say-
ing is one of the cornerstone s of mystical gratitude . Gratitude , in its
deepest sense , is an insight into the wise working of God. As cAttar
expressed i t in his poetical descriptio n of the mystica l states:
What is gratitude ? To imagine the rose from the thorn,
and to imagine the nonvisibl e part to be the whole.
(U4i)
Gratitude towar d God teaches man to see with the heart's eye the
blessings veile d in affliction . Yet "gratitud e is a wild bird the which
to catch and to fetter is difficult." 18 Patience , however , is a mount
that never fails on the difficult road.
Shukr, gratitude , is related to ridd, which is not a patient bearing
and sufferin g of all the vicissitude s of life, but happines s in poverty
and affliction . "Ridd is the joy of the heart in the bitternes s of the
divine decree " (L 53), says Dhu'n-Nun . Hujwiri is probably right
in his statement tha t ridd is a result of love, inasmuc h as the lover is
content wit h what is done by the beloved (H 180). It is definitel y the
attitude o f a loving heart, but the Sufis disagree about whether to
define it as a station or a state. A verse by Sana 3! defines the mufarrih,
a medicin e to make the heart more cheerful and to calm down ner-
vous tension , a kind of tranquilizer :
The mufarrih  that the saints make
is prepare d in the hospital of contentment .
(S 340
The story of Husri, an early tenth-centur y mystic, points to the es-
sence of contentment : "Husri once said in prayer: 'O God, art
Thou conten t with me that I am content with Thee?' And the an-
swer came : 'O liar—if you were content with Me, you would not
18. SanaVabad,  line 317.

--- Page 150 ---
THE PATH / 127
ask whethe r I am conten t with you' " (T 2:290). In perfect ridd the
mystic shoul d not think about whether or jiot God has accepted his
act of resignatio n and contentment ; he should accept every divine
decree, be it wrath or grace, with equanimit y and joy. This interior
joy, this perfect agreemen t with God's decrees, transform s the beg-
gar into a king and opens the way toward a participatio n in the
divine will , toward love and "higher predestinarianism. "
The mystic s differ in their opinion s as to whethe r "fear" and
"hope" (khauf  and raja*} are stations or states (Sarraj feels that they
are states) . Psychologically , one would prefer that they be classifie d
among th e stations , for they belong to the essentia l and long-
standing aspect s of mystica l life in its primary stages, and even at
later levels . To feel fear is essential for every pious Muslim . Did not
the Koran speak often of the fear of God, or fear of the Judgment ,
and does it not contain enough warning s to make the heart of even
the most pious tremble with fear? But hope is just as essential , for
life would be impossibl e without hope, and "fear and hope are the
two wings of action without which flying is impossible " (L 62). Or,
as Sahl saw it: fear is a masculin e element , hope a feminine one, and
the two together engende r the deepest realities of faith (K 89).
The early ascetics emphasize d the aspect of fear more than that
of hope. They even went so far as to attest that a man who lives in
fear inspire s his neighbors ' trust, for they know that they are secure
from his machination s and need not suspect him of meannes s (W
223). But even a representativ e of pure love mysticism , like Ruzbi-
han Baqli , praises fear of God as the "whip of divine power [jaba-
ruti], whic h hits the soul that command s to evil with the lash of
'decent behavior ' [adab]" (BA 223). The chapter on "Fear and
Hope" in Ghazzall's Ihyff culum ad-din reflects very well the differ-
ent attitudes
 of the faithful in regard to these state s and demonstrate s
the strengt h of the feeling that an equilibriu m betwee n both forces
is absolutel y necessar y for a sound religiou s life (G 4:288). 19
In the course of time, hope proved stronger than fear, though the
advanced mystic s knew fear as well and even rejoiced in it. But in
their case it is no longer the fear of God's judgmen t or the terrors
of Hell that keeps them on the watch, but rather the fear of God's
19. Al-Makki , Qut, 2:58(1. See the definitio n in al-Khanqahi , Guzlda,  p. 22: "Who
worships Go d only by fear, is a harun (i.e., Kharijite) , who worship s him only by
hope is a murjpite,  and who worship s him by love, is a zindiq, heretic" ; only a
balanced combinatio n of the three element s constitute s a true Muslim .

--- Page 151 ---
128 / THE PATH
makr, His "ruses." In the moment of perfect happines s the mystic
can never be sure that God will not use this exalted state as a snare
to capture him, to tempt him once more to worldly thought , pride,
hypocrisy, t o distract him from his highest goal. Miracles , for in-
stance, coul d be interprete d as divine ruses, for they are still con-
nected wit h the world; even the small joys of daily life might hide
ruses of God that should be feared. And who can be sure that he will
be saved or accepted by God? One can hope for it, but never without
fear.
However, th e notion of "thinkin g well" of God, i.e., of trusting
in His promise to forgive the sinner, proved stronge r in mystica l
life. Did not the traditio n attest that God's grace precede s His
wrath? Ou t of this faith grew the whole prayer life of the Sufis. Just
as the firm belief in God's unendin g mercy and the hope for His
loving-kindness permeat e the prayers of an early Sufi like Yahya
ibn Mu cadh, later mystics always relied upon the principl e of hope,
as Rumi put it in a lovely comparison :
[Is there anyone] who has sown the corn of hope in this
soil
to whom the spring of His grace did not grant hundred -
fold [fruit] ?
(D 1253)
But neithe r fear nor hope is required any longer once the wayfare r
has reache d his goal:
The seama n is always on the planks of hope and fear-
when the plank and the man become annihilated , there
remains onl y submersion .
(D 395)
The station s
 of fear and hope correspond , in the states, to what
is called bast and qabd. Bast, from the root "to get wider and en-
large," mean s an extensio n of enthusiasti c feeling, a perfect joy and
ease that may develop , in some cases, into true "cosmic conscious-
ness," into the feeling of partakin g of the life of everythin g created,
into that rapture of which the intoxicate d poets of Iran and Turkey
have sung so often. It is this state that inspired them to invent long
lines of anaphora circlin g around the beauty of the divine beloved
—verses tha t tried to describe His ineffable , sparklin g glory or con-
vey to others the state of happines s in which the whole world is seen

--- Page 152 ---
THE PATH / 12Q
in a changed light, transparen t and filled with opaline colors of
exquisite beauty .
What is bast'? To leave off the two worlds in one rapture,
to cast oneself en a hundred new worlds!
(U42)
But wherea s bast is the experienc e of extensio n and perhaps inten-
sification o f the self, qabd, "constraint, " means the compressio n of
the soul—"t o make one's home in a needle's eye" (U 42)—darkness ,
the oppressin g desert of lonelines s in which the mystic spends days
and sometime s months of his life. Nevertheless , qabd has been re-
garded as superior to bast by some leading mystics , for, as Junayd
says, "whe n He presses me through fear he makes me disappea r
from myself , but when He expands me through hope He gives me
back to myself" (G 33). In qabd, the "I" disappears , which is prefera-
ble to the extende d self-consciousnes s produce d by bast. In the
state of qabd, the "dark night of the soul," man is left completel y to
God, withou t any trace of himself, without strength to want any-
thing; and it is out of this darkness that the light of unitive experi-
ence, or of vision, may suddenl y appear—lik e the "sun at midnight. "
It is clear, from the previou s definitions , that the mystics were
fond of the juxtapositio n of correspondin g states. The manual s
enumerate lon g lists of such mystica l states, the true implication s of
which are difficult for the uninitiate d to understand . They speak of
hudur wa  ghaiba, "presence and absence, " which can be defined as
"presence nea r God and absence from oneself, " or vice versa. Jamc,
"collectedness" an d "perfec t unification, " goes together with taf-
riqa, "separatio n after union." Sukr, "intoxication, " is combine d
with sahw,  "sobriety. " Eventuall y the complementar y stages of
fand, "annihilation, " and baqd, "duration , remainin g in God," are
reached. Th e pair sukr and sahw is of special importanc e to mystical
terminology an d has been mentione d in connectio n with Junayd' s
criticism o f Bayezld. True sobriety is defined by Hujwlri as "reach-
ing the goal" (H 230), and the same author says that one of his mysti-
cal master s said: "Intoxicatio n is the playgroun d of children , but
sobriety is the death-fiel d of men" (H 186).
Before a discussio n of the last stations and states on the Path and
its goal, a definitio n that enables a better understandin g of some
Sufi formulation s should be mentioned . It is the word waqt, liter-
ally, "time, " which came to designat e the "presen t moment, " the

--- Page 153 ---
130 / THE PATH
moment i n which a certain mystica l state is granted to the Sufi.
"Time is a cutting sword"; it cuts whateve r is before and after it and
leaves ma n in absolut e nakednes s in the presenc e of God. The Sufi
has therefor e been called ibn al-waqt, "the son of the present mo-
ment," i.e. , he gives himself completel y to the momen t and receives
what God sends down to him withou t reflectin g about present, past,
and futur e (cf. N 285). But on the highest level of experience , when
the Sufi turns into a sdfl, "pure," it may be said:
The Sufi is "son of the Moment " . . .
The Sdfl is submerge d in the Light of the Majestic ,
not the son of anything , and free from "times " and
"states."
(M 3:1426 , 1433-34 )
LOVE AND ANNIHILATION
The last stations on the mystica l path are love and gnosis,
mahabba and ma^rifa.  Sometime s they were considere d complemen -
tary to each other, sometime s love was regarded as superior , and at
other time s gnosis was considere d higher. Ghazzal i holds: "Love
without gnosi s is impossible—on e can only love what one knows"
(G 4:254) . The Sufis have tried to define the differen t aspects of
mcfrifa, knowledg e that is not reached by discursiv e reason but is a
higher understandin g of the divine mystery . In later times the term
cdrif, "gnostic, " has often been used for the advance d mystic in gen-
eral, for "the faithfu l sees through God's light, the gnostic sees
through God " (L 41). Most of the mystics would agree with the mys-
tical interpretatio n of Sura 27:34, "Kings destroy a town when they
enter it"; the "king" is interprete d as mcfrifa, for this divinel y in-
spired knowledg e empties the heart completel y of everythin g so
that nothin g but God is containe d in it (W 170). The scholar s and
theoreticians o f Sufism, like Hujwir i (H 267), have written many
definitions o f mcfrifa, but the most poignan t formulatio n is that
of Junayd : "Gnosis ... is the hoverin g of the heart between declar-
ing God too great to be comprehended , and declarin g Him too
mighty to be perceived . It consists in knowin g that, whateve r may
be imagine d in thy heart God is the opposit e of it" (K 133).
We shall dwell here mainly upon those mystica l current s in
which lov e was praised as the highest possible state, followin g St.
Augustine's dictum , res tantum  cognoscitur  quantum  diligitur,

--- Page 154 ---
THE PATH / 131
"one can know somethin g only insofar as one loves it."20 The prayer
ascribed t o the Prophet is a good starting point: "'O God, give me
love of Thee, and love of those who love Thee, and love of what
makes m e approac h Thy love, and make Thy love dearer to me
than cool water" (G 4:253) . In early Sufism the problem of love
was the central point of divergence . Orthodox y accepte d mahabba
only as "obedience, " and even some of the moderat e mystics would
say that "to love God means to love God's obedience " (T 11287) or,
"true lov e is to act in the obedienc e of the beloved " (N 55). Abu
Talib al-Makk i sums up the ideas of moderat e Sufism: "The Proph-
et of God made love of God a condition of faith by saying that God
and His messenge r should be more beloved to the faithfu l than
anything else." 21 And the Sufis were certain that "nothin g is dearer
to God than that man loves Him" (T 1:321).
When Dhu 3n-Nun expresse d the though t that "fear of Hellfire ,
in compariso n with fear of being parted from the beloved , is like
a drop of water cas t into the mighties t ocean," 22 he stated very well
the main object of this early love mysticism . His younge r con-
temporary, Sar i as-Saqat i in Baghdad , who had first formulate d the
idea of mutual love between man and God, uttered the same feeling
in a prayer that has been preserve d by Hujwm :
It is the custom of God to let the hearts of those who love Him have
vision of Him always, in order that the delight thereof may enable them
to endure every tribulation ; and they say in their orisons: We deem all
torments mor e desirable than to be veiled from Thee. When Thy beauty
is reveale d to our heart, we take no thought of affliction . (H 111; cf. A
10:120)
It was apparentl y Sari's nephew Junayd who discovere d the truth:
"Love betwee n two is not right until the one addresse s the other,
'O Thou F" (T 2:29).
The whol e complex of love was so inexhaustibl e that the mystics
20. See "Love, Muhammadan, " in Encyclopedia  of Religion  and Ethics, ed. James
Hastings, 1 3 vols. (1908-27) , 8:176; Ignaz Goldziher , "Die Gotteslieb e in der islamische n
Theologie," De r Islam 9 (1919), a fundamenta l study of the early developmen t of
mystical lov e in Islam. Annemari e Schimmel , Studien  zum Begriff der mystischen
Liebe im Islam (Marburg , 1954); Schimmel , "Zur Geschicht e der mystische n Liebe
im Islam, " Die Welt des Orients,  1952. A number of scholars have maintaine d that
"love" constitute s the essence of Sufism; see, for example , Mir Valiuddin , Love of God
(Hyderabad, Deccan , 1968), or the antholog y by Rene Khawam , Propos d'amour  des
mystiques muslumanes  (Paris, 1960), and many popula r writings .
21. Al-Makki , Qut, 2:50.
22. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Mystics  of Islam (1914; reprint ed., Chester Springs ,
Pa., 1962) , p. 116.

--- Page 155 ---
1^2 / THE PAT H
invented differen t stages and used differen t terms to classify it; yet
the definition s given for hubb, mahabba,  wudd, and mawadda  are
by no means clear. The usual classificatio n of the stages in love dates
back to early times. Bayezid spoke of the fourfold nature of love:
"It has four branches : one from Him, that is His grace, one from
you, that is to obey Him, one for Him, and that is your recollectin g
Him, and one between both of you, and that is love" (A 10:242) .
Abu Tali b al-Makk i knew nine aspects of love, and Hujwir i gives
a classificatio n of the lovers, which Ghazzal i adopted as well, in
slightly elaborate d form: "Those who regard the favor and benefi-
cence of God toward them and are led by that regard to love the
Benefactor, an d those who are so enrapture d by love that they
reckon al l favors as a veil and by regardin g the Benefacto r are led
to [consciousnes s of] His favors" (H 308). As in most of the mystica l
states, som e reach love by more or less rational arguments , ascendin g
from the created to the creator, whereas others are completel y lost
in the vision of the creator and are brought to contemplat e created
things onl y because they are witnesse s of His greatness .
Among th e differen t stages of love, the Sufis have mentione d
uns, "intimacy" ; qurb, "proximity" ; shauq, "longing" ; and others.
The sequenc e differs accordin g to their persona l experiences . The
ascending step s are charmingl y described  in the saying: "The hearts
of the gnostics are the nests of love, and the hearts of the lovers
are the nests of longing, and the hearts of the longing are the nests
of intimacy " (A 10:362) . Complet e submersio n in intimac y is
illustrated i n the story of a Sufi whose master placed him in a lonely
corner. Th e master then completel y forgot him for a week, but
when he came and asked his guest to forgive him, the Sufi answered :
"Do not worry, God has taken away the fear of lonelines s from His
friend" (N 94)—th e intimacy with God leaves no room for wahshat,
"feeling frightene d by loneliness. " The term wahshat  is usually
meant as a complementar y term to uns—it include s the feeling of
loneliness i n the wilderness , far away from the intimac y and tran-
quility of home, but also the estrangemen t from everythin g created
that the Sufi feels in his intimacy with God (G 4:291). Uns, on the
other hand , is connecte d with the aspects of divine jamdl, the mani-
festation o f God's loving and consolin g qualities , and, as such, it is
contrasted wit h hayba, "reverence , awe," which awaken s in the
Sufi's hear t at the manifestatio n of God's grandeu r and power (cf.
A 9:377)-

--- Page 156 ---
THE PATH / 133
As to qurb, "proximity, " the Sufis have always been eager to
define it other than spatially ; it is an ethical proximity , brought
forth by the fulfillmen t of God's orders, the opposit e of separatio n
from God , caused by man's disobedienc e (H 148). Later mystics
invented a  complicate d system'o f differen t grades of qurb, like
"proximity o f the attributes " and "proximit y of the names," which
refer to the degree to which one is invested with higher, loftier
divine attributes . The term qurb an-nawdfil,  "proximit y caused by
supererogative work s of worship, " goes back to a hadlth qudsi that
must have been in circulatio n in very early times. God says:
My servan t ceases not to draw nigh unto Me by works of devotion , until
I love him, and when I love him I am the eye by which he sees and the
ear by which he hears. And when he approache s a span I approach a
cubit, and when he comes walking I come running . (L 59)
The Naqshbandiyy a school in India, however , prefers the qurb
al-farffid, cause d by the punctua l performanc e of the prescribe d
ritual dutie s and as such the "state of the prophets, " to the qurb
an-nawdfil, whic h is, for them, the station of the saints. It should
be added that some mystics would not accept the term qurb at all,
since it presuppose s a duality between lover and beloved , while
true Sufis m consist s of realizing unity (N 222).
This sam e feeling has led some mystics to deny the station of
"longing," fo r one longs for someon e absent, and God is never
absent (N 222). Contrary to those who considere d longing unneces -
sary, if not illicit, for a true lover lives constantl y with Him who
is "closer to you than your jugular vein" (Sura 50:16), others would
boast of their longing , like Bayezid : "If the eight Paradise s were
opened in my hut, and the rule of both worlds were given in my
hands, I would not give for them that single sigh which rises at
morning-time fro m the depth of my soul in rememberin g my long-
ing for Him . . . " (T i: 159).
Others, again , would claim that genuine longing has no end,
since the beloved has no end. The more the mystic approache s the
divine beloved , the more he apprehend s the fathomles s depth of
His qualities , the abyss of His essence : therefor e his longing to
plumb deepe r and more wonderfu l mysterie s can never end. Ghaz-
zali has describe d this state perfectly in the relevant chapter in the
Ihya* ^ulum  ad-dln (G 4:277). It is this dynamic force of love and
longing tha t has inspired so many Persian poets.

--- Page 157 ---
134 / THE PATH
Every momen t this love is more endless ,
in every time people are more bewildere d in it,
(Ug)
says cAttar, and  Hafiz continues :
The adventur e between me and my beloved has no end-
That whic h has no beginnin g cannot have an end.
How coul d this love, inspired by God, be adequatel y described ?
It is greater than a hundred resurrections ,
for the resurrectio n is a limit, whereas love is
unlimited.
Love has got five hundred wings, each of them reachin g
from the Divine Throne to the lowest earth.
(M 5:2189-90 )
That is how Rumi tries to explain the grandeu r of love, and °Urfi,
in the late sixteent h century , admonishe s the lover not to be heed-
less, "for in that sacred station of love there are a hundred places,
the first of which is resurrection!" 23
The only means of drawing near to the divine beloved is by
constant purificatio n and, in exchange , qualificatio n with God's
attributes. Junay d has defined this change brough t forth by love:
"Love is the annihilatio n of the lover in His attribute s and the
confirmation o f the Beloved in His essence" (H 40). "It is that the
qualities o f the Belove d enter in the place of the qualitie s of the
lover" (L 59). Many centurie s later, Shah Wallulla h of Delhi (d.
1762) invente d an apt symbol for this spiritua l purification , using
the traditiona l image of the fire of love: man, like a piece of ice,
will be put in a kettle on the flames; thus he will melt, become
warm, boil , and eventually , evaporatin g as steam, be as close as
possible t o the quality of heat inheren t in divine love. 24
Ghazzali ha s compare d this purifyin g love to the "good tree
whose roo t is firm and whose branche s are in the sky," as describe d
in the Koran (Sura 14:24); the fruits show themselve s in the heart,
on the tongue, and on the limbs (G 4:282). These fruits are obedi-
ence to the orders of God and constan t recollectio n of the beloved ,
which fills the  heart and runs on the tongue—th e importanc e of
23. cLJrfi-yi Shirazi , Kulliydt,  ed. Ali Jawahir i (Tehran , 1336 sh./i957) , p. 305.
24. Shah Wallullah , Sata^dt, ed. Ghulam Mustaf a Qasimi (Hyderabad , Sind, 1964),
no. 40.

--- Page 158 ---
THE PATH / 135
recollection fo r the development o f love has often been emphasize d
by the mystics (see pp. 167-78). This love is a flame that burns every-
thing excep t the beloved (M 5:588), just as longing is God's fire,
which He kindles in the hearts of His friends to burn down every-
thing that may occupy their hearts (L 64).
Obedience, a s the Sufis understoo d it, is complet e surrender -
acceptance o f the will of the beloved whethe r it manifest s itself in
kindness o r in wrath. Love neither diminishe s by cruelty nor in-
creases by kindnes s (H 404); and the lover has to remain at the
door of the beloved even if driven away—h e has "to make his soul
a broom at His door" (T 2:193). But even that degree of surrende r
was not enough for later generations , since it implies a shade of
self-will:
I want union with him, and he wants separation ;
thus I leave what I want so that his wish comes true
(G4:n7)
—that is how the true lover should act. Pain and death are welcome if
the belove d decrees it.
If you would say "Die!" I would die in full obedience ,
and woul d say "Welcom e to him who calls me to death."
(N 96; A 10:301)
For death means the annihilatio n of the individua l qualities , the
lifting of the veil that separate s the primordia l beloved from the
lover create d in time.
"There is nothing good in love without death" (G 4:300); death
may be understoo d as dying to one's own qualitie s or even as cor-
poreal death , since this lead s the lover toward the beloved (A 10:9).
The traditio n "die before ye die" gave the Sufis the possibilit y of
pondering th e implication s of the slaying of the lower qualities and
the ensuin g spiritua l resurrectio n in this life (cf. U 10). But "out-
ward" deat h was also an aim in itself, as the case of Hallaj shows—
to lift the disturbin g "I" that stands between lover and beloved .
Ghazzali relate s a touching story about Abraham , who was called by
the angel of death and refused to follow him, since he could not
believe tha t God would kill someone who had loved him so much.
But he was addressed : "Have you ever seen a lover who refuses to
go to his beloved? " Upon hearing this, he gladly submitte d his soul
to the angel (G 4:253). The lover who has learned to accept death

--- Page 159 ---
136 / THE PATH
as a bridge to the beloved should "give his soul with a smile like a
rose" (M 5:1255) ; that is why Hallaj danced in fetters when he was
led to execution . The idea that the martyr is granted special heaven-
ly privileges , as the Koran attests, has, perhaps , helped in shaping
the idea of the "martyr of love," who enjoys a special position with
God whe n he is killed by the sword of longing or has died on the
thorny pat h that leads toward the beloved , where thousand s of
hearts and livers adorn the thornbushe s like red flowers , as Ghalib
depicts th e way of love. The mystic s would rely on the Korani c
word: "D o not call them dead who have been slain for God's sake-
nay, they are alive" (Sura 3:163; B 281). It is the sword of Id, the
first half of the professio n of faith, that slays the lover (M 3:4098) ,
and then there remains nothing "but God" (M 5:589) . The rec-
ompense o f those slain by love is more preciou s than anythin g
else. The Sufis know a wonderfu l hadlth qudsl, which was revealed
to Shibll when he asked God about th e meanin g of Hallaj's martyr-
dom: "Who m My love kills, for him shall I be blood money. " The
martyr of love will be rewarde d by God Himself , no longer sepa-
rated from Him for whose love he has shed his blood.
Ideas suc h as these have led the mystics to accept willingl y all
kinds of tribulations , which were even regarde d as signs of special
kindness fro m God. "He is not sincere in his love who does not
enjoy the stroke of the friend" (L 50). But even that was not enough
—the sincer e person is the one who forgets the stroke when looking
at the friend. 25 Out of these ideas about suffering , later Sufi poetry
developed th e motif of the physicia n who wounds the patient and
heals him , the wound being healed only by the one who caused it
(A 10:273) . Tribulation s and affliction s are a sign that God is near,
for, to quote Hallaj's daring sentenc e again, "Sufferin g is He Him-
self." The more He loves a person, the more He will test him,
taking awa y from him every trace of earthly consolatio n so that the
lover has only Him to rely upon (A 9:345). It is small wonder that
a hadlth about this sufferin g was very commo n among the Sufis:
"The mos t afflicted people are the prophets , then the saints, and
then so forth." The prophets , being nearest to God, have to suffer
most, as is attested to by many Korani c stories, which were embel-
lished in the course of time; and the list of suffering lovers become s
longer fro m centur y to century . Affliction , balcf, is ingeniousl y
combined wit h the word bald, "Yes," that the souls spoke at the
25-Al-Makki, Qut,  2:67.

--- Page 160 ---
THE PATH / 137
Day of the Covenant , thus acceptin g in advance every tribulatio n
that migh t be showere d upon them until Doomsda y (SD 41; U 133).
Just as grape juice is purified by the constan t "tribulation " of
fermenting unti l it becomes pure wine, and just as wheat is ground
and kneade d and apparentl y mistreate d until it become s bread,
thus the human soul can mature only through suffering . And when
the asceti c seeks God's loving-kindnes s and forgivenes s (rahma),
the lover seeks his pain (zahma)—a  meaningfu l pun of Persian poets.
This indulgenc e in suffering , the feeling that affliction is the
fastest stee d to bring man to perfectio n (as Meister Eckhart said
just at the time that the greatest Sufis expresse d these views)—thi s
attitude ha s contribute d to the developmen t of a certain imagery
in later Sufi poetry that is difficult for uninitiate d Western readers
to appreciat e and that has even caused misunderstandin g among
modern Islami c thinkers . It is an imagery that compares , for ex-
ample, th e lover to the polo ball, rolling withou t head and feet
wherever th e friend's polo stick drives him.
Before th e tenth century , however , discussion s about mystical
love and longing were conducte d mainly on the theoretica l level.
The questio n was one of semantics . The word mahabba  had been
objected t o by the orthodox , but when the first attempts were made
to introduc e the word cishq, "passionat e love," into the relation
between ma n and God, even most of the Sufis objected , for this
root implie s the concept of overflowin g and passionat e longing ,
a quality that God, the self-sufficient , could not possibly possess;
nor was it permissibl e that man should approac h the Lord with such
feelings. Nurl , who probably introduce d the use of the word 'ishq,
defended himsel f by declarin g that "the ^dshiq 'lover' is kept at a
distance, wherea s the muhibb  'lover' enjoys his love" (B 289).
It was left to Hallaj openly to express by this term the inner dy-
namics of the divine life—"le desir essentiel, " as Louis Massigno n
calls it—a n idea that was to influenc e later Sufi thought decisivel y
until Fakhruddi n clraqi poeticall y changed the words of the pro-
fession of faith into la ildha illffl-^ishq,  "there is no deity save Love,"
a formulatio n that I often heard from Turkis h Sufis.
The discussion s on mystica l love became more complicate d in the
Baghdad circle s about 900, with the introductio n of the notion of
hubb cudhri, "platoni c love." Jamil, a noted poet from the tribe of
cUdhra in the late seventh century , had sung of his chaste love for
Buthayna i n delicate verses that almost foreshado w the love lyrics

--- Page 161 ---
138 / THE PATH
of Spanis h and French troubadours ; and soon a hadlth was coined,
according t o which the Prophe t had said: "Whoeve r loves and
remains chaste , and dies, dies as a martyr."
It was Muhamma d ibn Da°ud, the son of the founde r of the
Zahirite la w school who composed , in Hallaj' s day, a book on the
ideal chast e love, containin g one hundred chapter s of poetry about
hubb ^udhrl  and stressin g the necessit y of the "martyrdo m of chas-
tity." He and his follower s denied the possibilit y of mutual love
between ma n and God and exclude d every human object from
mystical love . Yet two centurie s later the two current s merged in
the verses of some of the greatest Persian mystica l poets.
Another accusatio n brough t against the love theories of the Sufis
was that they represente d Manichaea n ideas. Worship of God by
love is the sin of the Manichaeans , the heretics par excellenc e who
imagine tha t their souls are particle s of the eternal divine light,
imprisoned i n the body, and that a magnetic attractio n from the
origin of this love will attract them to become united with their
origin again . This interpretatio n is incorrec t for the early stages of
mystical love , but it points to a developmen t that was inheren t in
Sufi love theories : love became , with many of the later Sufis, the
"growing power " that causes the possibilitie s of perfectio n in every-
thing to unfold. 26 The "essentia l desire" of Hallaj's God often turns
into a more or less magneti c force that has caused emanatio n and
draws everythin g back to its source. 27
But love as experience d by the early Sufis is a strong persona l
and existentia l commitment . Hallaj did not even hesitate to place
it higher than faith (Imari): "It is a primordia l divine grace withou t
which yo u would not have learned what the Book is nor what Faith
is" (P 610). The mystics felt that the love they experience d was not
their own work but was called into existenc e by God's activity . Did
not the Koran attest: "He loves them, and they love Him" (Sura
5:59)—a wor d that shows that God's love precede s human love?
Only whe n God loves His servant can he love Him, and, on the
other hand , he cannot refuse to love God, since the initiativ e
comes fro m God (A 10:7). Love cannot be learned ; it is the result of
divine grace—"I f a world would draw love into it, it could not do it,
and if they would strive to reject it, they could not do it, for it is a
26. Ibn SIna, "Risdla  fPl-^ishq":  Traitee  sur I'amour,  ed. August Ferdinan d Mehre n
(Leiden, 1894) .
27. Fritz Meier, "Das Proble m der Natur im esoterische n Monismu s des Islams, "
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 4 (1946), p. 218, on Nasafi' s theories .

--- Page 162 ---
THE PATH / 139
gift, not an acquisition . It is divine" (H 398). The Sufis, deepenin g
the genera l Muslim knowledg e that the divine greatnes s overpow -
ers everything , have always felt that man is far too weak to seek God.
Not a single lover would seek union
if the beloved were not seeking it,
(M 3:4394)
sings Rumi , three hundre d years after these ideas had been formu-
lated for the first time. The idea that God was "a hidden treasur e
that longe d to be known " has grown out of this feeling of God's
desire to love and to be loved. He is, as Muhamma d Iqbal has said
in our day, "like us, a prisoner of Desire." 28
The Sufis have often tried to describ e the state of the true lover
in poetica l images. Bayezid saw the springlik e quality of love: "I
walked in the steppe, it had rained love, and the soil was moist-
just as the foot of man walks in a rose garden, thus my feet walked
in love" (T i: 155). And Shibll takes up this spring imagery , which
was to become a centra l theme of Persian poetry: "The 'time' of the
gnostic is like a spring day, the thunde r roars and the cloud weeps
and the lightnin g burns and the wind blows and the buds open
and the birds sing—thi s is his state: he weeps with his eyes, smiles
with his lips, burns with his heart, plays with his head, says the
friend's nam e and roams around his door" (T 2:177) . In descrip -
tions like this, technica l treatises on Sufism suddenl y turn into sheer
poetry. Man y of these description s are couche d in the form of a
hadlth, whic h declares , "verily God has servant s who . . .," or take
the form of a hadith qudsl, like the one quoted by Ghazzall :
Verily, I have servants among my servants who love Me, and I love
them, and they long for Me, and I long for them and they look at Me,
and I look at them . .. And their signs are that they preserve the shade at
daytime a s compassionatel y as a herdsman preserve s his sheep, and they
long for sunset as the bird longs for his nest at dusk, and when the night
comes and the shadows become mixed and the beds are spread out and
the bedstead s are put up and every lover is alone with his beloved, then
they will stand on their feet and put their faces on the ground and will
call Me with My word and will flatter Me with My graces, half crying
and half weeping , half bewildere d and half complaining , sometime s
standing, sometime s sitting, sometime s kneeling , sometime s prostrating ,
and I see what they bear for My sake and I hear what they complai n
from My love. (G 4:278)
28. Muhamma d Iqbal, Zabur-i ^ajam (Lahore , 1927), part 2, no. 29; trans. A. J.
Arberry a s Persian  Psalms (Lahore, 1948), part 2, no. 29.

--- Page 163 ---
14O / THE PATH
These lover s will be granted a special place at Doomsday , beyond
the communitie s of the various prophets , and those who love each
other in God will be on a pillar of red garnet and will look down
on the inhabitant s of Paradise. 29 But a descriptio n of mystica l love
is altogethe r impossible—n o one could put this truth better than
Sumnun, surname d "the Lover" : "A thing can be explaine d only
by somethin g that is subtler than itself. There is nothing subtler
than love—b y what, then, shall love be explained? " (H 173).
Science woul d be of no avail on this Path—onl y the light of gnosis,
the light of certainty gained through intuitiv e knowledge , could
help in approachin g the mystery of love. The science s are like eye-
glasses, whic h cannot see by themselve s but stand between the eye
and the objects, as a seventeenth-centur y mystic from Sind said,
using a modern image but remaining , in substance , faithful to the
traditional view . He explains by this image an alleged hadlth that
calls 'Urn,  "knowledge, " the "greates t veil" separatin g man from
God. On the way of love, intellect is like the donkey that carries
books (Sur a 62:5); it is a lame ass, whereas love is like the winged
burdq tha t brought Muhamma d into the presenc e of God (D 1997).
The contras t between love and discursiv e reason provide d an
inexhaustible topi c for later poets; they would like
to hang intellec t like a thief
when lov e become s the ruler of the country .
(D 420)
Thus the figure of Majnun , the demente d lover, lost in his con-
templation o f Laila, might serve as a model for the mystica l lover.
Love is the most genuine quality of the human race. God created
Adam ou t of love; Adam bears in himself the divine image, and
no other created being can follow him in the way of love.
When the angel falls in love,
he is the perfect human.
(U96)
The mystic s did not hesitate to give people who do not know love
names suc h as "cow," "jackass, " "hard stone," or "animal, " based
on the Korani c sentence , "they are like beasts, nay, even more
29. Abu 3l-Hasan ad-Daylaml , Kitdb  catf al-alif  al-ma^luf  ilfPl-lam  al-ma ctuf, ed.
Jean-Claude Vade t (Cairo, 1962), § 101, § 363.

--- Page 164 ---
THE PATH / 141
astray" (Sur a 7:178). The expressio n "lower than a dog" occurs
(M 5:2008) , for even animals know at least one aspect of love.
The most charmin g story in this respect, probably told first by
cAttar (U 129) and retold by clraql, deal s with a preacher in Shiraz
who spok e so poignantl y about love that everybod y dissolve d in
tears. A man had inquire d of him before the sermon whethe r by
chance he knew where his lost donkey had gone. After the sermon,
the preache r asked the communit y if there was anybody who had
never experience d love.
A certain fool ill-favore d as an ass
in sheer stupidit y sprang to his feet.
"Art thou the man, the elder asked, whose heart
was never bound by love?" Yea, he replied.
Then said the sage: "Ho, thou that hadst an ass,
lo, I have found thine ass. The cropper , quick!" 30
The genuin e lover is the most honored person in both worlds, for
the Prophe t said: "Man is with him whom he loves." Thus the lover
is constantl y with God, whom he loves to the exclusio n of every-
thing else (T 2:85).
Love is, for the Sufis, the only legitimat e way to educate the base
faculties. Th e rules of asceticism in themselve s are purely negative ;
as indispensabl e as they are, they have to be performe d out of love.
Only by this method can the shay  tan, the lower soul, be transforme d
—he become s like Gabriel, and his demonic qualitie s die (M 6:3648) .
Having reache d this stage, which may be called "loving tauhid,"
man sees with the eye of intuitiv e knowledg e and understand s the
ways of God. Loving acceptanc e of God's will can resolve the enigma
of free will and predestinatio n in a higher unity.
Whether th e final station be seen as love or as gnosis, the disciple
has to continu e in his preparator y activities , like dhikr and con-
centration, whic h may eventuall y lead him to the goal, fand and
baqd.31 H e should concentrat e on perfect collectednes s in contem -
plation (murdqaba],  and from this point he may attain vision
(mushdhada). Bu t it is a vision that can be describe d only approxi -
mately as presenc e or proximity , combine d with Cz7m al-yaqm,
30. Fakhruddl n clraqi, Th e Song of the Lovers  (cushshdqname), ed . and trans.
A. J. Arberr y (Oxford , 1939), pp. 30 ff.
31. Reynol d A. Nicholson , "The Goal of Muhammada n Mysticism, " Journal  of the
Royal Asiatic  Society, 1913.

--- Page 165 ---
142 / THE PATH
"knowledge o f certitude " (L 69). The station of sincere cilm al-
yaqln lead s further to fayn al-yaqin,  "vision of certitude " or "essence
of certainty"—th e station of the gnostics—unti l it is consummate d
in haqq al-yaqln, the "real certitude " or "reality of certainty, " which
is the place of God's friends. 32 These terms are taken from Sura 102
and Sura 56:95, where they have, however , no mystica l connotation s
at all. Haqq al-yaqln  is attained in fand', it has been symbolized ,
in Hallaj' s Kitdb at-tawdsln,  as the way of the moth, which experi-
ences Cz7m al-yaqln  when it sees the light of the candle, cayn al-yaqln
when it draws near and feels its heat, and haqq al-yaqln when it is,
finally, burne d and consume d by the flame.
The true meaning of fand has been one of the controversia l topics
in the study of Sufism. The German term Entwerden,  as used by
the medieva l mystics, is closer to its meanin g than words like
"annihilation," "bein g naughted, " or "passing away," since it is the
opposite o f "becoming, " werden.
Some scholar s have tried to equate fand with the Hindu or
Buddhist concep t of nirvana, but this is incorrect . It is not the ex-
perience o f being freed from a painful circle of existence , since
Islam lack s the idea of karma and accepts the reality of the indi-
vidual soul . Fand is, in the beginning , an ethical concept : man
becomes annihilate d and takes on God's attributes—i t is the place of
the allege d hadlth takhallaqii  bi-akhlaq  Allah, "qualify yourself
with the qualitie s of God," i.e., through constan t mental struggle
exchange you r own base qualities for the praiseworth y qualitie s by
which Go d has describe d Himsel f in the Koranic revelation . The
next stage is annihilatio n in vision, when the soul is surrounde d by
the primordia l light of God. The third and final stage, then, is "an-
nihilation fro m one's vision of annihilation, " in which one is
immersed i n the wujud, the "existence " of God or, rather, the
"finding" o f God. For the word wujud, which is usually translate d
as "existence, " means, originally , the "being found"—an d that is
what the mystic experiences . There is a well-know n verse that points
to existenc e as created in time:
When I said: What have I sinned? she answered :
Your existenc e is a sin with which no sin can be
compared.
(L59)
32. Al-Khanqahi , Guzlda,  p. 208.

--- Page 166 ---
THE PATH / 143
Man shoul d recover the state he had on the Day of the Primordia l
Covenant, whe n he became existentialized , endowed with individ-
ual existenc e by God, which, however , involved a separatio n from
God by the veil of creatednes s (cf. MM 65). This veil cannot be
lifted completel y during one's lifetime . The mystic cannot com-
pletely an d substantiall y be annihilate d in God, but he may be lost
for a while in the fathomles s ocean of bewilderment , as it has been
defined by KalabadhI : "Fand . . . may consist of being absent from
his own attributes , so that he appears to be really mad and to have
lost his reason .... For all that he is preserve d to perform his duties
to God .... On the other hand he may be a leader to be followed ,
governing thos e who attach themselve s to him" (K 131). The prob-
lem is whether or not the mystic can return to his own qualitie s
after this experience : "The great Sufis ... do not hold that the
mystic return s to his own attribute s after a passing away. They
argue tha t passing-awa y is a divine bounty and fit for the mystic,
a special mark of favour, not an acquire d condition : it is a thing
which Go d vouchsafe s to those whom He has chosen and elected for
Himself" ( K 127).
The best interpretatio n of fand and the followin g stage, baqd,
has been given by the Japanes e scholar Toshihik o Izutsu, 33 who
explains fand  as "the total nullificatio n of the ego-consciousness ,
when ther e remains only the absolute Unity of Reality in its purity
as an absolute Awarenes s prior to its bifurcatio n into subject and
object"—the stat e the Sufis would call jamc, "unification , collected -
ness." The Sufi experience s the return to the momen t when God
was, and there was nothing else. Fand is "certainl y a human ex-
perience .  . . but man is not the subject of this experience . The
subject is rather the metaphysica l Reality itself"—w e may think of
Ruml's attemp t at clarifyin g the same state with an exampl e taken
from grammar : mdta Zayd, "Zayd died," a sentence in which Zayd
is the subject, but not the acting subject (M 3:3683) .
Then man may reach the state of baqd, "persistence " or "subsis-
tence" in God, and experienc e the "second separation " or "gather-
ing of the gathering, " /amc al-janf: "Man is resuscitate d out of the
nothingness, completel y transforme d into an absolut e Self. The
multiplicity become s visible again—bu t in a changed form, namely
33. Toshihik o Izutsu, "The Basic Structur e of Metaphysica l Thinkin g in Islam,"
in Collected  Papers on Islamic  Philosophy  and Mysticism,  ed. Mehdi Mohagheg h and
Hermann Landol t (Tehran , 1971), p. ggf., an illuminatin g article .

--- Page 167 ---
144 / THE PATH
as determination s of the one Reality. " In this state, the mystic acts
completely throug h God.
When you seek baqd, request it from the dervishes —
the dervishe s are the warp and woof of the garmen t
(qaba) of baqd,
(SD 186)
says Sana 3!, with a fine pun; but for most of the mystics baqd is
connected particularl y with the propheti c activity . God, who has
promised th e loving soul that he will "become his eye by which he
sees," has shown this aspect of religious life, which is turned toward
the world in the acts of the prophets . For after the Battle of Badr
(624), Muhamma d was addressed : "Md ramayta idh ramayta,  'you
did not cast when you cast, but God did it' " (Sura 8:17). And al-
though man y Sufis claimed to have attained baqd, the distinctio n
between th e "saintly " and "prophetic " aspects of fand and baqd
gained ne w importanc e in later Sufi theories , mainly with the
Naqshbandls.
Fand is not to be confuse d with ittihdd,  "union," a term that
presupposes th e existenc e of two independen t beings and has, there-
fore, been regarde d as heretic, as has hulul, "indwelling, " which
means the incarnatio n of the divine in man. Orthodo x Muslim s
accused no t only the Christians , but also Hallaj and the represen -
tatives of love mysticism , of acceptin g the concept of hulul. Fand,
however, i s the nullificatio n of the mystic in the divine presence .
Later mystic s tried to explain the state of fand and baqd in won-
derful images . The metaphor s of Islamic mysticis m and philosoph y
are not merely poetic ornament s but are indicativ e of a peculiar
way of thinking . The Sufis have, for instance , spoken of the ex-
perience o f the Black Light—th e light of bewilderment : when the
divine ligh t fully appears in the mystic's consciousness , all things
disappear instea d of remainin g visible (medieva l and Renaissanc e
mystics in German y would speak of the uberhelle  Nacht}. Such is
the experienc e of fand—a. blackou t of everythin g until the mystic
perceives tha t this blacknes s is "in reality the very light of the Abso-
lute-as-such," fo r existenc e in its purity is invisible and appears as
nothing. T o discove r the clarity of this black light is to find the
green wate r of life, which, accordin g to the legends , is hidden in
the deepes t darkness— -baqd, persistenc e in God, is conceale d in the
very cente r of fand.

--- Page 168 ---
THE PATH / 145
Hallaj had used the allegory of the moth and the candle to allude
to the state of extinction . Rumi, in order to explain Hallaj's unitive
expression ancfl-Haqq,  compare s the mystic in this state to a piece
of iron that is thrown into the furnace and become s so hot that it
regards itsel f as fire (M 2:1445) , though a substantia l union cannot
be achieved . This imagery , known from Christia n mysticis m as well,
is also found in the terminolog y of the Nurbakhsh i mystics in Iran
(MM 129) .
The same Rumi has also interprete d Kharaqam' s saying—"ther e
is no dervish in the world, and if there be a dervish, that is non-
existent"—in a  line
 that perhaps comes closest to elucidatin g the
mystery o f fand:
Like the flame of the candle in the presence of the sun,
he is (really) non-existent , (though he is) existent in
formal calculation .
(M 3:3669-73 )
One of the stranges t symbols for the experienc e of fand and baqd
has been used by mystics from cAttar to the eighteenth-centur y In-
dian Mir Dard: The divine essence is compare d to a salt mine, into
which a dog, or a donkey, falls; thus, losing its low qualities , the ani-
mal is transforme d into this element and preserve d in it. The com-
parison is all the more fitting since bd-namak,  "saltish," also means
"cute, charming, " and can thus be used to describe the charmin g
beloved i n whom the lover become s completel y absorbed. 34
It is in this state of absorptio n that the mystics have sometime s
uttered expression s that do not fit into the orthodo x views, or even
into moderat e Sufism. The so-calle d shathiydt  (plural of shath],
like Hallaj' s and^l-Haqq  or Bayezld' s "Glory be to Me! How great
is My Majesty! " are among the most famous of these "theopathi c
locutions" o r paradoxes , to which Ruzbiha n Baqll has devoted a
whole book . Their study is one of the most interesting , but also
most difficult , topics in the history of Sufism, and the daring, partly
jubilant, partl y bewildere d words that Ruzbiha n has put together
and interprete d in an existential , authenti c way allow a glimpse
into the depths of mystical experience , which, however , can never
be appropriatel y expresse d in human words.
34. The same expressio n has also been used for the tomb. For the imager y see
Fariduddln c Attar, Dlwdn-i  qasa/'id wa ghazaliyat,  ed. Sacld Nafis I (Tehran , 1339
sh./ig6o), no . 515; Jalaluddi n Rumi, D 3041, M 2:1344, and M 6:1856; Khwaja Mir
Dard, "Dard-i
 Dil," no. 161, in Chahdr  risdla (Bhopal, 1310 h./1892-93) .

--- Page 169 ---
146 / THE PATH
Just as the mystics have constantl y invente d new symbol s to
describe th e state of fand and baqa, they have also attempte d to
show wha t tauhid is. Tauhid,  "to declare that God is One," is the
goal of religiou s life for the Muslim in general and for the Sufi in
particular. Hujwir i speaks of three kinds of tauhid: "God's unifica-
tion of God, i.e. His knowledg e of His Unity; God's unificatio n of
His creatures , i.e. His decree that a man shall pronounc e Him to
be one, and the creation of unificatio n in his heart; man's unifica-
tion of God, i.e. their knowledg e of the Unity of God" (H 278).
For the orthodo x mystics , tauhid meant, first of all, the recognitio n
that there is no agent but God and that everythin g and everybod y
are dependen t upon Him. This idea could easily lead to the ac-
knowledgment tha t only He had real existenc e and that only He
had the right to say "I"—tha t God is the only true subject .
In the chapter on love in the Ihya? *ulum ad-dln, Ghazzali defines
the orthodo x way of reaching tauhid very clearly:
Whoever look s at the world because it is God's work, and knows it be-
cause it is God's work, and loves it because it is God's work, does not look
save to God and does not know save God, and does not love save God,
and he is the true unifier (muwahhid)  who does not see anything but
God, nay who does not even look at himself for his own sake but because
he is God's servant—an d of such a person it is said that he is annihilate d
in unificatio n and that he is annihilate d from himself . (G 4:276)
This is an elaborate d formulatio n of what an earlier Sufi, quoted
by Hujwm , had said: "Unificatio n is this: that nothing should oc-
cur to your mind except God" (H 158). Junayd, in turn, has taken
the idea of tauhid back to the Day of the Primordia l Covenant :
Unification i s this, that one should be a figure in the hands of God, a
figure ove r which His decrees pass accordin g as He in His omnipotenc e
determines, an d that one should be sunk in the sea of His unity, self-
annihilated an d dead alike to the call of mankind to him and his answer
to them, absorbed by the reality of the divine unity in true proximity ,
and lost to sense and action, because God fulfils in him what He hath
willed of him, namely that his last state become his first state, and that
he should be as he was before he existed. (H 282-83)
True tauhid,  then, means to forget tauhid (B 383). It is a state in
which the sharp-sighte d are blinded and men of reason are con-
fused (L 33). The poets have often repeate d Abul-Atahiya' s
verse:
And in everythin g there is a witness for Him
that point s to the fact that He is One.

--- Page 170 ---
THE PATH / 147
The all-pervadin g presence of God as witnesse d by the muwahhid
has often been expresse d by the Sufis in the saying, "I did not see
anything withou t seeing God before it and after it and with it and
in it." Some parts of this sentence can be traced back to early Sufism
and have been attribute d by some later writers to the first four
caliphs of Islam as representin g the four differen t approache s of
one who confesse s tauhid. 35 But Hujwm has given the more correct
version—Muhammad ibn Wasi c said: "I never saw anythin g without
seeing Go d therein, " which indicate s an advance d stage of contem-
plation in which the mystic sees only the agent. This insight can be
developed throug h perfect faith and is istidldli,  "gained through
inference." Shibli , however , exclaimed : "I never saw anythin g
except God."  Enrapture d (jadhbi),  he sees only God, nothing else
(H 91, 330).
It was easy to move from Shibll' s statemen t to the feeling ex-
pressed in so many Persian and Turkish verses: "In mosque s and
taverns, in pagan and Muslim only God I saw!" The mystics could
support suc h expression s from the Koran: "Whithersoeve r ye turn,
there is the Face of God" (Sura 2:109), a sentence that forms one
of the cornerstone s of later mystica l theories, supplyin g the Sufis
with the proof that God, the only agent, the only true existent , is
visible, to  the enlightene d mystic, in every shape and behind every
disguise. A s Sanaa's famous lines attest:
The word that you speak about faith may be Hebrew or
Syrian,
The place that you seek for God's sake, may be Jablaqa
or Jablasa .
(SD 52)
From here it is only one step to the feeling of God's all-embracin g
presence tha t Persian poets since cAttar (U 223) have condense d
in the sentence hama ust, "Everythin g is He"—an interpretatio n of
tauhid tha t has always been attacked by the more orthodo x Sufis
because it apparentl y denies the transcendenc e of God. It is from
these enthusiasti c expression s of unity, found in most of the Persian
mystics in more or less outspoke n form, that Western scholars have
gained th e impressio n that Sufism is nothing but measureles s
pantheism.
Sarraj, thoug h rather close to the beginning s of Sufi speculation ,
35. Al-Attas , The Mysticism  of Hamza al-Fansuri,  p. 265.

--- Page 171 ---
148 / THE PATH
is certainl y right when he says that the manifol d definition s of
tauhid def y explanatio n and convey only a weak shade of the
reality—"and i f one enters into explanatio n and expression , then
its splendou r become s hidden and disappears " (L 31).
FORMS O F WORSHIP 36
Ritual Prayer
One of the five pillars of Islam is the ritual prayer (salat;
in Persian and in Turkish , namdz) to be performe d five times a day
at prescribe d hours betwee n the momen t before sunrise and the
beginning o f complet e darkness . In the Koran, night prayer was
recommended bu t not made obligator y for believers . Early Muslim
ascetics an d mystics regarde d ritual prayer, in accordanc e with the
Prophet's saying , as a kind of ascensio n to Heaven , as a mfraj that
brought the m into the immediat e presenc e of God. "Ritual prayer
is the key to Paradise, " says a tradition ; but for the mystics , it was
even more . Some of them connecte d the word salat with the root
wasala, "t o arrive, be united" ; thus, prayer became the time of
connection, th e momen t of proximit y to God (L 150). Did not the
Koran repeatedl y state that all of creation was brought into being
for the purpose of worshipin g God? Thus, those who wanted to
gain specia l proximit y to the Lord, and prove their obedienc e and
love, were , withou t doubt, those who attribute d the most impor-
tance to ritual prayer. They might even be able to make the angel
of death wait until their prayer was finished (T 2:113).
One of the prerequisite s of ritual prayer is that ritual purity
(tahdra) b e performe d accordin g to the strict rules laid down in the
Prophetic tradition . The mystics laid great stress on the meticulou s
performance o f the ablutions , which became , for them, symbols
of the purificatio n of the soul (H 293). A good translato r of the
feelings o f his fellow mystics , Shibli said: "Wheneve r I have ne-
glected an y rule of purification , some vain conceit will rise in my
heart" (H 293). Hagiographica l literatur e is filled with stories about
36. Friedric h Heiler, Das Gebet, 5th ed. (Munich , 1923); translate d by Samuel Mc-
Comb as Prayer (1932; paperbac k ed., New York, 1958), condense d and withou t the
extensive critica l apparatu s of the original . Heiler's book is the best introductio n to
the proble m as seen by a historia n of religion . Edwin Elliot Calverley , Worship  in
Islam, Being  a Translation,  with Commentary  and Introduction,  of al-Ghazzali's  Book
of the "Ihya?"  on the Worship  (Madras , 1925).

--- Page 172 ---
THE PATH / 149
Sufis who indulge d in ritual purificatio n to the extent that they
would perfor m the great ablution (ghusl) before every prayer or
before visitin g their spiritual director (N 292), which was, for them,
a religiou s duty comparabl e to prayer. Some would purify them-
selves in a river even in the middle of the Central Asian winter;
others woul d become enrapture d at the very moment the water for
ablution wa s poured over their hands. 37 And a number of Sufis
boasted o f being able to perform the morning prayer while still in
ritual purit y from evenin g prayer, meaning that they had neither
slept nor been polluted by any bodily function . Some of them even
reached a  state of remaining i n ritual purity for several days.
As for the details of ritual prayer, the early Sufis followe d the
prescriptions o f the law exactly . They tried to imitate the model
of the Prophe t even in the smalles t details. Since one traditio n
holds tha t Muhamma d once performe d the saldt of tiptoe, some
Sufis wante d to follow him in this peculiar way; but a dream vision
informed on e of them that this was reserved exclusivel y for the
Prophet an d that the normal believer need not imitate it (X 24).
If confine d to bed, they would repeat each prostratio n and move-
ment twice , since, accordin g to the tradition , "the prayer of the
sitting ma n is worth only half that of the standing person" (X 39;
cf. S 144). Stories are told about mystics who, though unable to
walk or move at all, regained their strength the very momen t the
call to prayer was heard, but returned to their state of weaknes s as
soon as they had performe d their religiou s duty.
At the momen t the mystic utters the niya (the intentio n to per-
form his prayer) with the correct number of rak^as (units of prostra-
tion, genuflection , etc.), he expresse s the intentio n to turn away
from everythin g created. During prayer he feels as if he were waiting
before Go d at Doomsday . Muhasib i has describe d well this feeling
of overwhelmin g awe:
What predominate s in the heart of the mystic while he is at prayer is his
sense of the mystery of Him in Whose Presence he stands and the might
of Him Whom he seeks and the love of Him Who favours him with
familiar intercours e with Himself, and he is consciou s of that until he
has finishe d praying, and he departs with a face so changed that his
friends woul d not recognise him, because of the awe that he feels at the
Majesty of God. It is so that one who comes into the presence of some
king, or someone for whom he yearns and whom he fears, stands in his
37. Mir CA1I Shir Qani c, Tuhfat ul-kiram  (Hyderabad , Sind, 1957), p. 386.

--- Page 173 ---
150 / THE PATH
presence, wit h a different attitude from what was his before he entered
and goes out with an altered countenance . And how should it not be so
with the
 Lord of the world, Who has not ceased to be nor will cease to
be, He Who hath no equal? 38
Muhasibi's younge r contemporar y Kharraz , "in a book in which
he describe s the etiquett e of ritual prayer" (L 152 £.), makes us
sense eve n more intensel y the mystic' s attitude as require d in his
saldt:
When enterin g on prayer you should come into the Presenc e of God as
you would on the Day of Resurrection , when you will stand before Him
with no mediato r between , for He welcome s you and you are in confiden -
tial talk with Him and you know in whose Presence you are standing , for
He is the King of kings. When you have lifted your hands and said "God
is most great" then let nothing remain in your heart save glorification ,
and let nothing be in your mind in the time of glorification , than the
glory of God Most High, so that you forget this world and the next,
while glorifyin g Him.
When a man bows in prayer, then it is fitting that he should after-
wards rais e himself, then bow again to make intercession , until every
joint of his body is directed towards the throne of God, and this means
that he glorifies God Most High until there is nothing in his heart
greater tha n God Most Glorious and he thinks so little of himself that he
feels himsel f to be less than a mote of dust. 39
The most touchin g descriptio n of this state of awe, in which every
limb join s in the worship until body and mind alike are directed
toward God , is Rumi's story of Daquqi and his congregationa l
prayer (M 3:2140-44 , 2147-48) :
Daquqi advance d to perform the prayer: the compan y
were the satin robe and he the embroidere d border .
Those [spiritual ] kings followe d his leadership ,
[standing] i n a row behind that renowne d exemplar .
When the y pronounce d the takblrs,  they went forth from
this world , like a sacrifice.
O Imam, the [real] meaning of the takblr is this: "We
have becom e a sacrifice, O God, before Thee."
At the momen t of slaughterin g you say Allah akbar: even
so [do] in slaughterin g the fleshly soul which ought to
be killed ....
Whilst performin g the prayer [they were] drawn up in
38. Margare t Smith, Readings  from the Mystics  of Islam (London , 1950), no. 16.
Al-Harith al-Muhasibi , Kitdb ar-ric aya li-huquq  Allah, ed. Margare t Smith (London ,
1940), p. 28.
39. Smith , Readings,  no. 26.

--- Page 174 ---
Woman in  trance at a saint's tomb in Pakistan.
Photograph by  Dr. Jan March, Prague
 
 Image Not Available 
 
--- Page 175 ---
152 / THE PATH
ranks befor e God as at Resurrection , and engaged in
self-examination an d orisons.
Standing i n God's presence and sheddin g tears, like one
who rises erect on [the day of] rising from the dead.
Notwithstanding thei r eagernes s to perform the saldt punctually ,
some Sufi s reached such a state of absolute absorptio n or rapture
that ritua l prayer seemed to constitut e for them an interruptio n
of their mystica l state. Hujwirl has denned the various types of
mystics b y their attitude s toward the saldt: some hold that it is
a means of obtainin g the presenc e of God; others regard it as a
means of obtainin g absence (H 301). Some would pray hundred s
of rak^as a day in order to remain in constan t communio n with
God; other s had to ask somebod y else to count their rak^as during
the act of prayer because they themselve s were not capable of doing
it, since, in their enrapture d state, time could expand into thou-
sands of years in one hour (N 455), so that the correct timing would
escape them . Some mystics regarded saldt as an ascetic disciplin e
that was absolutel y necessar y to preserve and that the disciple s had
to follow carefully ; others saw and experience d it as an act of divine
grace. Th e Sufi who experience d mystica l union through prayer
would certainl y prolong his saldt by adding long litanies of supere-
rogative rak'as  to the basic, prescribe d form, whereas the mystic
whose raptur e or contemplatio n was more or less interrupte d by
the prescribe d ritual would certainl y not perform more than the
minimal requirements . When a Sufi was completel y lost in ecstasy
for a period of days, or even weeks, he was exempt from praying .
There wer e mystics who were transporte d into an ecstatic state as
soon as they pronounce d the word "Allah" in the beginnin g of the
call to prayer, without even reachin g the next word, akbar, "most
great" (N 281). And the mystica l poets—beginnin g with Hallaj—
often spok e of the state in which intoxicatio n and perfect love
would mak e them forget morning and evening and the times of
ritual prayer. 40
The Sufis have interprete d the meanin g of the saldt differently .
Most of them would probabl y agree with Najmuddi n Kubra's defi-
nition tha t prayer accordin g to the sharfa is service, accordin g to
40. Husay n ibn Mansur al-Hallaj , "Dlwdn,  Essai de reconstitutio n by Louis Mas-
signon," Journal  asiatique,  January-Jul y 1931, Muqatta ca no. 20; see Shibli in N 181.

--- Page 176 ---
THE PAT H / 153
the tarlqa,  proximity , and accordin g to the haqiqa,  union with
God!41
An esoteri c interpretatio n might see in the differen t movement s
of the praying Muslim a representatio n of the movemen t of wor-
ship foun d throughou t creation : the prostratio n remind s him of
the vegetabl e state, the rukif, "genuflection, " of the animal state,
and the upright position is the prerogativ e of human beings. Every-
thing worship s God in its own way. The angels spend eternitie s
worshiping th e Lord in a single attitude , accordin g to their rank;
only man can represent , in his differen t prayer movements , the full-
ness of adoratio n that is the duty of everythin g created. 42 This idea
underlies a  Bektash i poem in which the forms of prayer are con-
nected wit h the name of Adam, the model of humanity :
When yo u stand up, an alif is formed, I
In bendin g behold: a ddl is made; j
When yo u have prostrated , amim takes shape: *
That is, I tell you, to perceive man—Adam . * ^ |
(BO 207)
Other interpreter s have seen in the Arabic letters of the name of
Muhammad (-u»« ) the figure of man, prostrate before God. And
Bedil, in the late seventeent h century , compare s the human life
to the movement s of ritual prayer:
Youth is standin g upright , old age genuflection , and
annihilation prostration .
In existenc e and nonexistenc e one can do nothing but
perform th e ritual prayer.
(Divan 1:386 )
"The prostratio n of the body is the proximit y of the soul" (M 4:11),
for God Himsel f said in the Koran: "Prostrat e and draw near"
(usjud wcfqtarib;  Sura 96:19).
The formula e used during the ritual prayer were also interprete d
according t o their esoteric meaning—especiall y the fdtiha, the first
Sura of the Koran, which is recited in Islam as often as, or perhaps
even mor e than, the Lord's Prayer in Christianity :
4i.Najmuddin Kubra , Risdla ft fadilat as-saldt (Istanbu l Universites i Kiitiiphanesi ,
Arab. 4530) , ab.
42. Henri Corbin, "Imaginatio n creatrice et priere creatric e dans le soufisme d'Ibn
Arabi," Eranos-Jahrbuch  25 (1956), p. 195.

--- Page 177 ---
154 / THE PATH
Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds!
The Compassionate , the Merciful !
King on the day of reckoning !
Thee onl y do we worship , and to Thee do we cry for help.
Guide Tho u us on the straigh t path,
The path of those to whom Thou hast been gracious ;
with who m Thou art not angry, and who go not astray.
A hadlth  qudsi makes God declare that He has divided this prayer
between Himsel f and His servant . Relying on this sentence , Ibn
eArabi foun d in the seven lines of the fdtiha the perfect expressio n
of the relation betwee n man and God: the first three lines are the
action of the faithful directed toward the Lord, the fourth line is
a reciproca l action, and the last three lines express the divine activity
acting upo n man. 43
The differen t interpretation s the Sufis give of the ritual prayer
and its details would fill a large volume . They range from the simple
act of obedienc e to the feeling that God himself perform s the prayer,
as Ibn al-Fari d says in the Tffiyya:
Both of us are a single worshippe r who, in respect to the
united state , bows himself to his own essence in every
act of bowing .
None praye d to me but myself, nor did I pray to any one
but mysel f in the performanc e of every genuflexion. 44
Even the mystica l interpretation s of ritual prayer were not suffi-
cient to satisfy the mystic' s thirst for more and more intimat e dis-
course wit h his beloved . The proble m of how such prayer might
reach Go d has been posed more than once—perhap s most impres-
sively by Niffari, who was graced by God's address :
Thou desires t to pray all night, and thou desirest to recite all the sections
of the Quran therein; but thou prayest not. He only prays all night who
prays for Me, not for any known rosary or comprehende d portion of
scripture. Hi m I meet with My face, and he stays through My Self-subsis -
tence, desirin g neither for Me nor of Me. If I wish, I converse with him:
and if I wish to instruct him, I instruct him.
The peopl e of the rosary depart when they have achieved it, and the
people of the portion of the Quran depart when they have read it; but
my people depart not, for how should they depart? 45
43. Ibid., p. 187.
44. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Idea of Personality  in Sufism (1921; reprint ed.,
Cambridge, 1967) , p. 19; verse 153-54 of the Ta?iyya.
45. Niffari , Mukh., no. 50.1-2.

--- Page 178 ---
THE PATH / 155
True praye r is constant . It cannot be limited to a number of rak^as
and portion s of the Koran, but permeate s man's whole being—a n
idea that in our day has been expresse d once more by Muhamma d
Iqbal, wh o follows Rumi's example. 46
Free Prayer* 7
In part, the longing for more and more intense conversa -
tion with God was satisfied by the possibilit y of uttering free prayers .
Adoration, a s well as supplication , is an importan t part of the
mystical praye r life, and if the classica l rule lex orandi lex credendi
can be applied anywhere , it certainl y applies to the mystica l circles
in Islam.
"To be deprive d of prayer (du'a) would be a greater loss for me
than to be deprive d of being heard and granted " (T 1:56). These
words of one of the very early Sufis form a keynote for our under-
standing o f the moderat e Sufi viewpoin t concernin g prayer. Prayer
can be classifie d as an intimat e conversation , mundjdt,  betwee n
man and God, as an exchang e of words of love that console the af-
flicted hear t even if they are not immediatel y answered . It is "the
language o f yearnin g for the beloved " (Q 121). From this viewpoint ,
the importanc e of night prayer in mystica l circles can be properl y
understood. Accordin g to the tradition , Hasan ibn CA1I, the Proph-
et's grandson , was once asked:
How is it that those people are most beautifu l who pray
at night?
He said: Becaus e they are alone with the All-Mercifu l
who cover s them with ligh t from His light.
(G 1:323 )
And anothe r mystic who neglecte d nightly prayer was accused by
God: "H e lies who claims to love Me, and when the night comes
sleeps awa y from Me" (H 458). Night prayer, though perhap s worth-
less in the eyes of the commo n people , is "like a radiant candle" in
God's eye s (M 3:2375) .
Only the stern, quietisti c mystics—i n Islam as well as in other re-
ligions—doubted whethe r it was lawful to utter a prayer at all: God,
46. Annemari e Schimmel , "The Idea of Prayer in the Though t of Iqbal," Moslem
World 48 (1958): 3.
47. Annemari e Schimmel , "Some Aspects of Mystica l Prayer in Islam," Die Welt
des Islam,  n.s. 2 (1952): 2.

--- Page 179 ---
156 / THE PATH
they thought , is "too mighty to be joined by prayer, or to be sepa-
rated from by omitting to pray" (K 144). They thought that silent
patience i n afflictio n was more suitable than prayer. One of the
leading Khurasania n ascetics and author of a book on renunciatio n
(Kitdb az-zuhd),  cAbdallah ib n Mubarak , said: "It is about fifty
years since I have prayed or wished anyone to pray for me" (Q 144).
Since everythin g is preordained , why pray? It would be better to
leave onesel f to complet e tawakkul  and practice perfect content-
ment with whateve r has been sent by God. Even Dhu Dn-Nun is re-
ported to have told a man who asked him for a prayer: "If some-
thing has been preordained  by God for you, then many unspoke n
prayers hav e already been heard; otherwise : what use has the drown-
ing person  for shouting ? Only that he is the sooner drowned , and
more wate r comes into his throat" (N 126). However , this attitude
of perfect resignatio n cannot be regarded as typical for the Sufis in
general. Mos t of them firmly believed in the necessit y and impor-
tance of prayer, since God Himsel f had ordered in the Koran:
"Pray, and I will answer!" (Sura 40:62).
Ghazzali, whos e Ihya?  culum ad-din  contains a long chapter about
free prayer , formulate d an answer to the objectio n that prayer is in-
compatible wit h predestination : predestinatio n include s the possi-
bility of averting evil by prayer "in the same way as a shield averts
the arrows : they work against each other" (G 1:298). He repeats
here an idea that Yahya ibn Mucadh had expresse d three centurie s
before him : "When fate meets me with a ruse of affliction , I meet it
with a ruse of prayer" (A 10:53). It was Yahya whose prayers echo
the proble m of sin and grace and always end in hopeful trust in
God's forgivenes s and help. In fact, the necessit y of istighfar,  "to ask
forgiveness," is , as a rule, mentione d among the preparator y stages
of true prayer. The early Sufis liked to ponder over the paradoxica l
relation betwee n human weaknes s and divine power, and when
cAttar say s in one of his poems:
I am not, but all evil is from me,
There is nothing but Thou, but all beneficenc e is from
Thee,
(AD 633)
he has given a sophisticate d form to the bewildermen t that is one of
the characteristic s of Sufi prayer life. Most of the great authoritie s

--- Page 180 ---
THE PATH / 157
on Sufism did, in fact, urge their disciple s to continu e prayer and to
pray trustfully . The sixteenth-centur y Egyptia n mystic Shacram has
described, i n touchin g words, the dark night of the soul through
which he had to pass for a month withou t being able to pray. 48
Many mystica l masters gave concrete prescription s even for the
so-called "free " prayer—suffic e it to mention GhazzalF s classifica -
tion of ducd in the Ihya 3 (G 1:274), where the rules for each and
every possibl e prayer are so detailed that they amount almost to a
new branc h of strictly organize d worship and seem to lack any free
movement o f the heart. The correct timing of prayer and the correct
attitude durin g the prayer were regarded as highly important , as
was the outward form: rhymed prose, for example , should not be
used in free prayer. Yet the great Sufis often compose d their finest
prayers in rhymed prose. Special importanc e is attribute d to repeti-
tions of prayer formula e and Koranic verses. Three, seven, fifteen,
fifty, seventy , and one thousan d are the most common number s for
the repetitions . These particula r number s are in accordanc e with
the belief in magical numbers all over the world, but in Islam these
rules are regarde d as inherite d from the Prophe t and his compan -
ions.49 Th e concept of the ducd mcfthur,  the prayer that is effective
because it was first uttered by some pious person or inspired by the
Prophet throug h a dream, 50 has greatly influence d Muslim popula r
piety, as Constanc e Padwick has shown in her fine book, Muslim
Devotions.51 Throug h this channel of "approve d prayers " and "ef-
fective prayers, " mystica l piety was infused into the large masses
and did more to form their religiou s consciousnes s than the formu-
lae used in the prescribe d ritual.
This popula r devoutnes s of the heart is reflected in one of RumFs
finest stories , that of the shepherd' s prayer, in which Moses, repre-
senting establishe d religion , is taught that the heart's stammerin g
and helples s sighing, and even childish imagery in prayer, is more
acceptable to Go d than learned and correct forms—provide d the one
praying utter s his words in perfect sincerity and surrender :
48. cAbdul Wahha b ash-Sha crani, Lawaqih  al-anwar  al-qudsiyya  (Cairo, 1311
h-/1893-94), p . 113.
49. Ignaz Goldziher , "Zauberelement e im islamische n Gebet," Orientalische  Studien
Theodor Noldeke  zum siebzigsten  Geburtstag  gewidmet,  comp. Carl Bezold, 2 vols.
(Giessen, 1906) , 103 £., on "magical " element s in Muslim prayer .
50. See Abd al-Hami d Farid, Prayers  of Muhammad  (Karachi , 1960).
51. Constanc e E. Padwick , Muslim Devotions  (London , 1960), one of the finest books
on Musli m piety and religiou s life.

--- Page 181 ---
158 / THE PATH
Moses saw a shepherd on the way who was saying:
"O God who chooses t (whom Thou wilt):
Where art Thou, that I may become Thy servant and sew
Thy shoe s and comb Thy head?
That I may wash Thy clothes and kill Thy lice and bring
milk to Thee, o worshipfu l One;
That I may kiss Thy little hand and rub Thy little foot
(and when ) bedtime comes I may sweep Thy little
room,
O Thou to whom all my goats be a sacrifice, O Thou in
remembrance o f whom are my cries of ay and ah!"
Moses wa s horrifie d at these words: "What babble is this? What
blasphemy an d raving? Stuft some cotton into your mouth!" (M
2:1720-24, 1728) . But he had to learn that the simple-minde d shep-
herd had attained a higher spiritua l rank than he, the haughty
prophet.
The Sufis knew that prayer, in the sense of petition , is a preroga-
tive of man—thoug h everythin g created praises God in its own
tongue, ma n alone can address God and speak of his sorrows and
hopes, puttin g them before the wise Lord. Though He has preor-
dained the course of the world, He wishes—a s Kazarun i has pointed
out (T 2:301)—t o honor man by answerin g his prayers. Even more:
God longs for human prayer and "He afflicts man out of yearning
for his prayer" (L 136). A hadith quoted by Qushayr i tells that God
orders Gabrie l not to answer the prayers of His beloved servant for
the pleasur e He takes in his voice, and Rumi has illustrate d this
rather anthropomorphi c view in a story in which he compare s hu-
mans at prayer to nightingale s and parrots, which are put into cages
so that their owners may enjoy the sound of their sweet melodies .
God loves these prayers, and so he grants them immediat e fulfilmen t
only when he dislikes the person who prays—jus t as one gives a piece
of bread to an ugly, old beggar whom one wants to leave the door as
soon as possible (M 6:4217-30) . This is not a very lofty theologica l
thought, bu t it is not unusual in Sufi poetry. Rumi has also spoken
of the scent of his burnt liver ascendin g through his burning prayers
into the divine presenc e (M 5:2259)—strongl y remindin g us of the
Old Testamen t imagery of the heart and liver as a burnt offering .
Another proble m is the matter of how far one can press God in
one's prayers . The true lover is allowed to use a language that does

--- Page 182 ---
THE PATH / 159
not befit common people; the rules of etiquette may be suspende d
in the relation between lover and beloved (T 2:29). In their lonely
prayers, som e mystics would utter words that would normall y be
considered irreverent , even crude, by the average believer (G 4:292).
"Muslim Mystics ' Strife with God" in their prayers forms a special
chapter in the history of Sufism. 52 The numerou s stories told by
cAttar in his epics show how deeply he was concerne d with this prob-
lem. He depicts enrapture d and demente d people who leave aside
every rule of orthodox prayer and even threaten God in order to ob-
tain this or that favor. "One has to show Him the teeth!" says one of
cAttar's heroe s (U 218) when he asks God to send him some food im-
mediately fo r an unexpecte d guest—whic h food, of course, arrives
from the unseen, to the great surprise of the visitors. Such prayers,
unbridled b y any formalities , are found in the Turkish popular tra-
dition as well, mainly in Bektash i poetry. How often these poets
followed Yiinu s Emre's example of accusing God of having created
a perfectl y nonsensica l arrangemen t for the Day of Judgment ! Simi-
lar words can be heard even today when some village "saint" feels
advanced enoug h to threaten God in order to gain his desired end—
an act often approximatin g magic.
Frequently repeate d in this kind of "strife with God," and espe-
cially in prayer-poem s all over the Islamic world, is the complain t
that God afflicts most those whom He loves most and who love Him
most. Lon g lists of suffering prophet s and mystics have been drawn
up to show God His seeming injustic e and, eventually , to bring
about a glad acceptanc e of suffering if He sends it down on the pray-
ing mystic himself.
On the whole, the moderat e Sufis agree that God's not answerin g
every praye r eventuall y proves to be as useful for the petitione r as
the grantin g of his wish would be. ^bdu'l-Qadi r Gilani feels that
such a divine reluctanc e keeps man constantl y between fear and
hope, the ideal state of the pious 53—but, practicall y enough, he adds
that every prayer that has not been answere d will at least be written
in the heavenl y book on the credit side. "Many a prayer, if heard,
would involv e destruction , and it is divine wisdom not to answer it"
(M 2:140) , says Rumi in the Mathnawl,  where he frequentl y dis-
cusses thos e prayers that are not answere d out of divine kindness ,
52. Hellmu t Ritter, "Musli m Mystics ' Strife with God," Oriens  5 (1952).
53. See Walter Braune , Die "Futuh  al-gaib"  des cAbdul Qddir  (Berlin and Leipzig ,
19S3)-PP- 10 °. M3-

--- Page 183 ---
l6o / THE PATH
because Go d knows that they would lead, eventually , to destructiv e
results. Th e real value of prayer, is to find consolatio n in the act of
praying, b y which human will is made to conform to the divine will.
These ideas , so central to prayer theology , and thus to the whole re-
ligious life , were taken up once more by Muhamma d Iqbal, who of-
ten speaks of the miraculou s power of true prayer, which ends in a
complete conformit y of the human to the divine will, in a change
and sublimatio n of man's hopes and anguish .
He turns the dried-u p seed of prayer into a marvelou s
date-palm,
Just as in Mary's birth pangs her pain was rewarde d by
a shower of dates,
(M 5:1188 )
Rumi says , with poetical imagery derived from the Koran (Sura
19:25). Extrem e mystics like the maldmatiyya  seem to have been
unhappy an d disappointe d when their prayers were answered , for
they were afraid that such an unexpecte d favor might be a ruse, an
attempt o n the part of God to mislead them.
A prayer that will always be granted is the prayer for others. The
formula o f blessing and prayer for the Prophet was part of the pre-
scribed ritua l and has often been elaborate d as a prayer to be re-
cited a number of times on every occasion . One has to pray for one's
parents, fo r those whom one loves, and for those who have aided,
wittingly o r unwittingly , in one's progress—eve n the highwa y rob-
ber who may have been a cause for one's repentanc e should be in-
cluded in the mystic's prayer (M 4:81-99) . Thus, many Persian ,
Turkish, an d Urdu epic poems and numerou s prose works end with
an invitatio n to the reader to recite a prayer for the author and for
the scribe . And one should remembe r the words of a mystic who
longed fo r solitude with God but was constantl y asked to teach
people som e steps on the mystica l Path: "O God, whosoeve r dis-
tracts me from Thee, distract him from me by Thyself! " (N 54)—a
prayer tha t would involve two noble goals.
It is understoo d that the Sufi should implore God not for worldly
goods but only for spiritual bounty. For the advance d mystics, only
God Himself—increas e in His love, His vision—should b e the object
of all prayer. Nevertheless , we read and hear many legends about
Sufi master s who were mustajab  ad-du^d,  "whose prayers were
heard" so that "if he would ask for somethin g God would certainl y

--- Page 184 ---
THE PAT H / l6l
grant it." In illness and danger, in times of dearth and need, they
would utte r an effectua l prayer for themselve s or their fellow towns-
men, and they were capable of punishin g those who disagree d with
them. Th e stories told about the miraculou s powers of praying
saints sometime s approac h the realm of fairy tales and sheer magic
—one sheik h was so powerfu l in his prayers that he was able to help
restore a fallen angel to his place in the celestia l hierarch y (N 379).
Some of the prayers practice d by certain Sufis—mainl y in later
periods—are i n fact very close to magica l incantation : the master
played wit h the letters of the Arabic alphabet , he compose d prayers
by derivin g every possible word from a particula r Arabic root—fo r
example, th e root underlyin g a specific divine name—o r wrote
prayers in alphabetica l order, filling them with certain words and
letters tha t are considere d powerfu l and impressive . The names of
God, with their practica l implications , were used accordin g to the
wish and need of the person praying ; the number of repetition s re-
quired to make these names efficient is dependen t upon the numeri -
cal value of the name (thus, rahman,  "the Merciful, " has the nu-
merical valu e of 299 and should be repeate d that many times).
Illness coul d be cured by applyin g the appropriat e divine name;
and to strengthe n the power of prayers, strange-soundin g words of
non-Arabic origi n and intricat e names of angelic beings were added.
But true mystica l prayer is the one in which trust in God, love,
and longin g are reflected . Not to ask for Paradise nor to express the
hope of being saved from Hell—tha t is the ideal of the selfless love
that shoul d underli e every though t of the Sufi. The only reason a
mystic migh t ask for Paradise would be his hope for the visio beati-
fica, but even that would not be accepted by the Sufis of later times.
Bayezid Bistam I expresse d this absolutenes s of the mystica l quest-
God spoke : "Everybod y wants somethin g from Me, only Bayezid
wants Me Myself" (T 1:152).
Many centurie s later, the mystica l poet of Delhi, Mir Dard (d.
1785) poeticall y describe d the true mystic' s state in prayer: "The
hand of the gnostic' s prayer turns over the leaves of the booklet of
involuntariness, simila r to the leaves of the plane tree whose object
is not to grasp the skirt of the rose of wish. They must follow the
blowing o f destiny' s wind; in what manner it moves them they are
moved."54 Th e essence of mystica l prayer is neither asking nor peti-
tioning; it s essence is everlastin g praise and adoration . Daqqaq ,
54. Dard, "Sham c-i mahfil, " no. 118, Chahar  risdla.

--- Page 185 ---
l62 / THE PATH
Qushayri's master , classified prayer in the usual threefol d way:
"There ar e three degrees: to ask, to pray, to praise. Asking belongs
to those who wish this world, praying to those who wish the other
world, an d praising to those who wish the Lord" (T 2:195). That
corresponds t o Qushayri' s enumeratio n of the stages of gratitude ,
culminating i n "thankin g for the thanking. "
The Prophet' s word—" I cannot reckon up Thy bountie s and the
infinite prais e and thanksgivin g due to Thee from me"—is the core
of mystica l piety. Even though the Sufi could feel in consonanc e
with everythin g created in his constan t adoration , he knew that
neither hi s words of praise nor his silent worship was sufficien t to
express th e gratitud e and adoratio n that he owed to his creator.
The darknes s of the night and the brightnes s of the day, the beams of the
sun and the light of the moon, the murmurin g of the waters and the whis-
pering of the leaves, the stars of the sky and the dust of the earth, the
stones of the mountains , the sands of the desert and the waves of the
oceans, th e animals of water and land praise Thee. 55
This is the feeling out of which the prayers of Dhir'n-Nu n devel-
oped. In prayers of hymnic praise or calm admiratio n the mystica l
feeling of the Sufis found its most natural outlet. Out of this feeling,
poetical prayer s were written. The monorhyme d forms of Arabic,
and consequentl y Persian, Turkish , and Urdu poetry, are ideal ve-
hicles for mystica l experience , whether it be in the long qaslda
(mainly a praise poem) or in the short ghazal (love poem). Outside
the Arabic-speakin g world, the rhyme was often extende d by the
addition o f a radif, an additiona l rhyme word or even a whole sen -
tence that is repeated . Thus, the mystica l poet can go on reiteratin g
one of the divine names in the radif, or by carefully chosen words
emphasize hi s main goal. His longing seems to be more eloquen t if
repeated dozen s of times in the same poetical utterance . The whole
poem turn s around one central idea, which is, by the differen t
rhyme words , reflected from differen t angles, broken up, brought
into a new pattern , at times uprising , at other times becomin g a
monotonous hammering . The constan t call to God, the intense
yearning an d longing , fear and hope, are most impressivel y heard
in the poetical prayers written in the Muslim world. A hybrid form,
which becam e typical of later Persian poetry, combine s love poem
55. [Jalaluddi n RumI?] , Aurdd-i Mauland  (Istanbu l Universites i Kiitiiphanesi , Arab.
148), fols. 25 ff.; see T 2:295.

--- Page 186 ---
THE PATH / 163
and praye r so that it is often difficult to judge which level of experi-
ence the poem reveals . Rumi's ghazals are wonderfu l specimen s of
this ambiguou s style, which was refined by Hafiz, in whose poems it
achieved a  fascinatin g iridescence . The poetica l elaboration s of
classical prayer s as found in the great mystica l epics, like cAttar's
work or Rumi's Mathnawl,  are some of the finest example s of re-
ligious poetr y in the Persian-speakin g world.
A special genre, develope d primaril y in Iran and the countrie s
under its cultural influence , is the qaslda in honor of the divine
creator, whic h became in the course of time a sort of vehicle for the
author's displa y of eloquenc e and erudition , filled with strange
allusions an d complicate d antitheses . Most of the great writers of
Iran and Indo-Pakista n have compose d such praise hymns, in which
they dwelt , in impressive , sometime s unexpected , images, upon the
mystery o f God's beauty and majesty , His grace and wrath, and the
marvels o f creation . And the more eloquen t they were, the more
they were inclined t o confess in ever new forms their utter inability
to correctl y and aptly express their praise and adoration .
Persian, Turkish , and Urdu epics alike usually begin with a
poem of invocation , which disclose s the theme of the poem. When
the poet sings about the love of Majnun and Laila, he will praise
God as the creator of love and beauty in his introductor y hymn.
When he intends to write a heroic epic, he may speak, first, of God's
majesty, power , and wrath. In many hymns that begin as poetical
descriptions o f the divine glory and power, the poet becomes so en-
raptured b y his own laudator y words that he turns from the imper-
sonal "He " of descriptio n to the persona l address "Thou" and ends
in a prayer full of enthusias m and love.
The perfec t way of interpretin g true mystica l prayer was shown
by Ruml. He was asked: "Is there any way to God nearer than the
ritual prayer? " In his work Flhi ma fthi, he answered :
No, but prayer does not consist in forms alone. . . . Prayer is the drown-
ing and unconsciousnes s of the soul, so that all these forms remain with-
out. At that time there is no room even for Gabriel, who is pure spirit.
One may say that the man who prays in this fashion is exempt from all
religious obligations , since he is deprived of his reason. Absorptio n in
the Divin e Unity is the soul of prayer. (MC 1:371)
But Rum l knew well that it is impossibl e to reach this mystica l
union by means of contemplation , and it is impossibl e by human

--- Page 187 ---
164 / THE PATH
effort eve n to utter any word of true prayer: everythin g is divine
grace. All huma n thought , all human longing to reach God, is noth-
ing but God's work.
The idea of the oratio infusa, the God-give n prayer, can be under-
stood in three different ways, accordin g to the conceptio n of tauhid
the Sufi practices :
1) God the creator has preordaine d every word of prayer;
2) God, dwelling in the heart of man, addresse s him and inspires him to
answer; o r
3) God, the unique existent , is both the object of prayer and recollectio n
and the praying and recollectin g subject.
God addresse d mankin d first by the address of love that was mani-
fested on the Day of the Covenant—"A m I not your Lord?"—i n
order that man might praise Him and adore Him as the only object
of worship . Abu Ishaq al-Kazaru m is right in his prayer: "O God,
Thy kindnes s toward us is without end, and it is of Thy kindnes s
that Thou hast given us the grace to recollect Thee with the tongue
and to thank Thee with the heart" (T 2:299). The Sufis' familiarit y
with this idea is indicate d by an alleged hadlth that speaks of the
prayer of Moses: " O Lord, Thou hast commande d me to be grateful
for Thy blessing , and my very gratitud e is a blessing from Thee." 56
This is, surely , a typical Sufi prayer. Centurie s later, Ibn cAta° Allah
(d. 1309) prayed in the same manner: "O God, if Thou dost not give
us faith, we have no faith, and if Thou dost not loosen our tongue
for prayer , we do not pray." 57 For all human action depends upon
God, is decreed by Him, and is performe d in executin g His eternal
and everlastin g will. Ibn Qayyim  al-Jauziyy a (d. 1350), known as an
orthodox Muslim , says in his small Kitdb asrdr as-saldt: "And He is
the Most High who praises Himself through the tongue of the prais-
ing one; for it is He who brought the praise upon his tongue and
into his heart and moved it with His praise. And it is man's duty to
acknowledge tha t the praise he gives, God has given him by an act
of grace and when he praises Him on account of this gift his praise
demands anothe r praise." 58
The feelin g that prayer was indeed inspired by God must have
56. Abu Bakr al-Kharraz , "Kitdb as-sidq":  The Book of Truthfulness,  ed. A. J.
Arberry (Oxford , 1937), Arabic, p. 47; English , p. 38.
57. Ahma d Ibn cAta:> Alla h al-Iskandari , Mundjdt  (Istanbu l Universites i Kutiip-
hanesi, Arab . 1574), fol. 6b.
58. Ibn Qayyim al-Jauziyya , Kitdb asrdr as-saldt (Istanbu l Universites i Kutuphanesi ,
Arab. 2347) , fol. 143.

--- Page 188 ---
THE PATH / 165
been vivid among the first generation s of Sufis. Abu Bakr al-Kattan i
told his disciples : "He never loosens man's tongue for prayer nor
makes the m busy beseechin g forgivenes s of sins, without opening
the door of forgiveness " (T 2:123). And Niffarl, the greatest theo-
logian of prayer in the tenth century , was addresse d by God: "To
Me belong s the giving: if I had not answere d thy prayer, I should
not have made thee seeking it."59 God, dwelling between the cortex
of the heart and the heart, as Hallaj said in one of his prayer-poems ,
converses wit h His friends in a secret tongue, and they silently an-
swer His speech.
Hallaj's lyrica l prayers are the most sublime colloquie s between
man and God, the mystic's answer to God's eternal call: "I call Thee,
no, Thou callest me unto Thee!" 60 God is the source of seeking, and
the mystic s knew what Rumi expresse d in one unforgettabl e verse:
Not only the thirsty seek the water,
the water as well seeks the thirsty.
(M 1:1741 )
Every lov e relation is mutual, inspired by the beloved and an-
swered by the lover. The idea of prayer as a gift of divine grace,
found in early Sufism just as in Christia n theology , has been de-
scribed by Rumi in a poem that became famous at the very outset
of orienta l studies in Europe. 61 For many historian s of religion it
constitutes th e most exquisit e expressio n of Muslim mystica l life.
The poet tells the story of a man who
cried "Allah " till his lips grew sweet with praising
Him.
The Devi l said: O man of many words, where is the re-
sponse "Her e am I" to all this "Allah"?
Not a single respons e is coming from the Throne—ho w
long will you say "Allah" with grim face?
He was broken-hearte d and lay down to sleep; in a dream
he saw Khidr amidst the verdure ,
Who said : Hark! You have held back from praisin g God:
why do you repent of calling unto Him?
He answered : No "Here am I" is coming to me in re-
59. Niffarl , Mukh., no. 42.10.
60. Al-Hallaj , Diwan, qasida no. i, verse 2; see also Muqatta^dt,  no. 59.
61. Annemari e Schimmel , "Maulan a Rumi's Story on Prayer, " Yddndme  Jan Rypka,
ed. Jiri Becka (Prague , 1967).

--- Page 189 ---
l66 / THE PATH
sponse; I fear that I am turned away from the Door.
Said Khidr : Nay; God saith: That "Allah" of thine is My
"Here am I," and that supplicatio n and grief and ar-
dour of thine is My messenge r to thee.
Thy fear and love are the noose to catch My favour,
Beneath ever y "O Lord" of thine is many a "Here am I"
from Me.
(M 3:189-98 )
Although thi s story has been criticize d by Tholuc k as leading to
immanentism an d self-contemplation , it seems that; such a danger is
out of the questio n if one compare s the numerou s verses of the
Mathnawl tha t reveal the same idea, i.e., that prayer springs from
God's presenc e in the heart and is answere d even before it has been
uttered.
Rumi aske d God:
Teach us to pray (M 2:2206) .
Thou has t given and taught this prayer:
otherwise ho w could a rose garden grow out of the
dust?
(M 2:2443 )
Since praye r is given by God, He will respond in a mysteriou s way.
Both the prayer and the answer are from Thee.
At first Thou givest desire for prayer,
and at the last Thou givest likewise the recompens e for
prayers.
(M 4:3499 )
A long list of similar prayers could be drawn from the Mathnawl.
Rumi ofte n symbolize s the idea of oratio infusa through the im-
age of man as the instrumen t on which God plays: he is the harp,
touched b y His hands so that it may give forth sound; he is the flute,
which sing s only when the divine breath first fills it. From whateve r
side one looks, prayer is always an answer to the divine address.
It is only natural that these ideas should have been elaborate d
and theoreticall y supporte d by Ibn cArabi and his followers . Henri
Corbin ha s shown how the idea of prayer (prayer as the typical form
of mystica l experience ) permeate s the work of Ibn cArabi. Sinc e the
great maste r of Sufi theosoph y has greatly impresse d later Sufi

--- Page 190 ---
THE PATH / 167
thought an d poetry, it would be easy to find hundred s of verses in
Persian o r Turkish poems like that of Ibn cArabi's faithfu l inter-
preter Maghrib I (d. ca. 1406), who expresse s the theorie s of tran-
scendental unit y of being in prayer form:
And if I send Thee greetings , Thou art the greeting ,
and if I speak, Thou art the prayer. 62
Dhikr63
Ritual an d free prayer are aspects of Muslim spiritua l
life share d by mystics and nonmystic s alike. But the distinctiv e
worship o f the Sufi is the dhikr (theomnemie,  as Nwyia calls it with a
term borrowe d from Byzantin e Christianity), 64 the remembranc e
or recollectio n of God—a recollectio n that can be performe d either
silently o r aloud (cf. K 95-97). Defender s of both practice s found
Koranic sanction : "Be not loud-voice d in thy worship , nor yet silent
therein, bu t follow a way between " (Sura 17:110) . The Sufi prac-
tices of dhikr were founde d upon a Koranic order, "and recollec t
God often " (Sura 33:40), for, as another word attests, "the recollec -
tion of God makes the heart calm" (Sura 13:28).
"Dhikr is a strong pillar in the path toward God, nay rather the
most importan t pillar" (Q 35), for nobody can reach God withou t
constantly rememberin g Him. Indeed , "life withou t the though t
(yad) of Him is altogethe r wind (bad}" (S 94). In moder n termi-
nology on e may say that concentrate d recollectio n sets free spiritua l
energies tha t provide help in the progress on the Path.
The particularl y attractiv e aspect of dhikr is that—in its primary
form (no t in its later, highly develope d phase)—i t is permitte d in
any place and at any time; its practice is restricte d neither to the
exact hour s of ritual prayer nor to a ritually clean place. God can be
remembered anywher e in His world. Wheneve r the adept finds dif-
ficulties o n the Path, "dhikr is the sword by which he threaten s his
enemies, an d God will protect him who remember s Him con-
stantly in the momen t of affliction and danger " (Q 37). Only in ex-
ceptional case s might a Sufi feel that it is a sign of reverenc e not to
62. Edwar d G. Browne , A Literary  History of Persia, 4 vols. (1902; reprint ed.,
Cambridge, 1957) , 3:336.
63. Louis Gardet, "La mention du nom divin, dhikr, dans la mystiqu e musulmane, "
Revue Thomiste,  1952-53; G.-C. Anawati and Louis Gardet , Mystique  musulmane
(Paris, 1961) , pp. 187-234 . The main dhikr formulae are found in G 1:302 ft.
64. Paul Nwyia, Ibn cAta3 Allah  et la naissance  de la confrerie  sadilite (Beirut, 1972),
p. 251.

--- Page 191 ---
l68 / THE PATH
mention God' s name too often, lest it be misused (Q 38). On the
whole, th e Sufis would agree that the heart of the faithful must be
"perfumed wit h the recollectio n of God." Recollectio n is the spiri-
tual food of the mystic. A disciple of Sahl at-Tustar i became hungry
and, after days of starvation , asked: "O master , what is the food?
And Sahl answered : The recollectio n of God the Immortal " (T
1:259). Th e heart could be compare d to Jesus, who was nurture d
by Mary's milk, to which the dhikr correspond s (L 116). It leads to
a complet e spiritualization , and "he who remember s God perma-
nently is the true companio n (jails) of God" (B 638), for God has
promised i n a hadlth qudsl: "and jallsu man dhakarani,"  "I am the
companion o f him who recollect s Me."
Dhikr is the first step in the way of love; for when somebod y loves
someone, h e likes to repeat his name and constantl y remembe r him.
Therefore th e heart of him in whom the love of God has been im-
planted wil l become a dwelling place of constant dhikr (A 10:44).
It is, as cAttar show s with a slightly amusing image, one of the four
elements b y which the perfect Sufi is formed:
The soul needs warm love, the dhikr should keep the
tongue wet ,
dry asceticis m and piety are required ,
and a cold sigh from the coolnes s of Certitud e will be
added:
these are the four element s to constitut e a well balance d
human being .
(Un)
The mystic s have credited Muhamma d himself with the praise of
dhikr:
He who recollect s God among the negligen t
is like a fighter in the midst of those who flee,
like a green tree in the midst of dry trees.
(G 1:265)
This last verse has contribute d to the imagery of popular mystica l
folk poetry . The poets of Turkey (followin g Rumi and Ytinus Emre)
and of Muslim India often compare d the heart to a tree, which
lives and moves only by the breeze of love and is nourishe d by the
water of the dhikr; it is the jasmine tree watered by the Id and Hid
(the two parts of the professio n of faith, which was frequentl y used

--- Page 192 ---
THE PATH / l6g
in dhikr),  as Sultan Bahu of the Punjab sang. His younge r con-
temporary, Sha h cAbduDl-Latif i n Sind (d. 1752), devoted a whole
chapter o f his poetical work to the dry tree that needs the water of
recollection t o be revived.
The mystic s who urged their disciple s to "teach the nightingal e
of the tongue the dhikr" 65 constructed , as in the case of the mystical
stations an d states, a progressio n of various degrees of recollection .
It must be remembere d that the talqln adh-dhikr,  the teachin g of
the formul a of recollection , was one of the most importan t aspects
of mystica l initiatio n and was later develope d into a complicate d
art. Only a dhikr properly inspired by the spiritua l director , and
constantly controlle d by him, was effective , and we may well be-
lieve the story told about Sahl at-Tustar i (who had learned the first
simple formula e as a child from his uncle):
Sahl said to one of his disciples : Strive to say continuousl y for one day:
"O Allah! O Allah! O Allah!" and do the same the next day and the day
after that—unti l he became habituate d to saying those words. Then he
bade him to repeat them at night also, until they became so familia r
that he uttered them even during his sleep. Then he said: "Do not repeat
them any more, but let all your faculties be engrosse d in rememberin g
God!" Th e disciple did this, until he became absorbe d in the thought of
God. One day, when he was in his house, a piece of wood fell on his head
and broke it. The drops of blood which trickled to the ground bore the
legend 'Allah ! Allah! Allah!" (H 195)
This growin g presence of the divine in the heart has been explaine d
theoretically b y a number of later Sufis. Shah Walmlla h devotes a
whole paragrap h of his Sata^dt to this phenomeno n (no. 39).
The dhikr  could be learned , if not from a living master, then
from Khidr , the mysteriou s guide of the wayfarers ; but it had to be
a proper initiation . The formula has to be transmitte d through the
chain of spiritua l leaders that goes back to the Prophet himself or
to an angelic inspirer of Muhammad . Sometime s the differen t tech-
niques of dhikr were traced back to the first caliphs: the Prophe t
allegedly taugh t Abu Bakr the silent dhikr when he was with him
in the cave during his emigratio n to Medina, whereas CA1I was grant-
ed the loud dhikr. 66
Since the ninth century the rosary (tasblh, subha] has been used
to count the repetition s of the formulae , yet a true mystic would
regard thi s medium as a toy "to attract heedlessness " (N 79). A Sufi
65. SancPPabad,  line 391.
66. Josep h Fletcher , The Old and New Teachings  in Chinese  Islam (forthcoming) .

--- Page 193 ---
170 / THE PATH
performing th e true recollectio n would scarcely use it, for being
lost in his prayer. Still, sometime s "heedlessness " was needed as re-
laxation fro m the mental stress of constant , intense dhikr (N 71).
There is no reason to doubt stories accordin g to which Sufis were
completely drowne d in sweat when uttering the shahdda  (N 166) or
were able to melt the snow around them becaus e of the heat of their
meditation ( N 138)—th e same is said about the tapas, the ascetic
"heat" of the Hindu ascetics , and about Christia n saints. A later
handbook order s the Sufi to drink water after performin g the dhikr
to cool down the interna l heat that he has produced. 67 Some ascetics
among th e Indian Sufis added to the difficult y of their task by sitting
in front of a fire on a summer day so that the heat was, in fact, in-
tolerable fo r anybody— a custom inherite d from Hindu ascetics. 68
This is an exaggeratio n of dhikr practices .
Even thoug h the general recollectio n of God is licit anywher e
and at any time, the "official " dhikr should be execute d after per-
forming som e preliminar y acts. Accordin g to Simnan i (d. 1336), the
mystic shoul d sit cross-legged , the right hand on the left, and the
left hand keeping the right leg in position on top of the left leg (CL
115).69 Eve n if the sitting style might vary accordin g to the orders,
the correc t position was considere d of great importanc e for the suc-
cess of the dhikr, and the manual s carefull y explain the relevan t
rules. Th e adept must not only purify himself inwardl y and out-
wardly befor e enterin g the cell to perform his dhikr, but should
keep the image of his sheikh before his eyes for spiritua l help dur-
ing the recollection . This practice is, apparently , not of very early
origin, bu t was elaborate d by the orders.
The mystica l leader had to decide, first, which kind of dhikr was
fitting for the spiritua l stage of his disciple . "The recollecte d object
is one, but the recollection s are variable , and the places of the heart
of those who recollec t are different " (X 286), says Ibn Khafif. The
wayfarer wh o lives in the station of hope will need a formula dif-
ferent fro m that used by a mystic in the station of renunciatio n or of
complete trus t in God.
67. Sha cram, Risdla  fi talqin adh-dhikr  (Istanbu l Universites i Kutuphanesi , Arab.
3531).
68. Muhamma d A3zam Tattawi , Tuhfat at-tdhirln,  ed. Badr-i cAlam Durran i
(Karachi, 1956) , p. 166.
69. Fritz Meier, Die "fawd^ih  al-gamdl  wa fawdtih al-galdl"  des Nagmuddin  al-
Kubrd (Wiesbaden , 1957), p. 202; and Johann Karl Teufel, Eine Lebensbeschreibung
des Scheichs  cAli-i Harnaddnl  (Leiden, 1962), pp. 80 ff.

--- Page 194 ---
THE PATH / 171
As has been mentioned , dhikr is generall y divided into two
branches: recollectio n with the tongue (dhikr jail, jahri,  calanlya,
lisdnl] and recollectio n in the heart (dhikr khafl, qalbi}. The latter
is usually recognize d as superior to the former—ther e is even a
hadlth to underscor e its high rank (L 42); the spoken dhikr, how-
ever, play s an importan t role in the common ritual of the dervishes :
"A man asked Abu cUthman al-Hirl : 'I recollec t with the tongue,
but my heart does not become friends with the recollection. ' He
answered: 'B e grateful that one of your limbs obeys and one of your
parts is led aright: maybe later your heart too will come into ac-
cord' " (T 2:59). Even he who offers the dhikr with his tongue only
polishes th e mirror of his heart so that it becomes pure enough to
reflect God' s beauty. But, as one Sufi has said, it is the mirror itself
that shoul d be cleaned , not its handle or its back—if the disciple
does not realize the implication s of this thought , the danger is that
he perform s his silent dhikr "with his stomach , not with the heart"
(N 390).
Dhikr has also been classified accordin g to the traditiona l triparti-
tion: "a recollectio n with the tongue, that is reckoned for ten good
works, wit h the heart, that is reckone d for 700 good works, and
a recollectio n the reward of which can neither be reckone d nor
weighed—that is , to be filled with His love and awe of His nearness "
(L 219). Or, as Kharraz has defined it:
a recollectio n with the tongue not felt by the heart—tha t is the usual
recollection; a  recollection wit h the tongue in which the heart is present
—that is a recollectio n seeking reward, and a recollectio n when the heart
is wanderin g in recollectio n and lets the tongue be silent, and the worth
of such a recollectio n is known only to God. (T 2:44)
The dhikr  should permeat e the mystic's whole being, so that in con-
stant dhikr  he forgets the recollectio n of everythin g else; "every -
body who forgets to recollec t the [created ] things in recollectin g
God, is guarded by all things, since God has become a substitut e
for all things" (T 1:321). That sentence was written by Yusuf ibn
Husayn ar-RazI , who may have gotten this idea from his part-tim e
master Dhu Dn-Nun, t o whom similar words are ascribed . The com-
plete relianc e upon God and absolut e love of Him that both cause
dhikr and result in dhikr make the mystic independen t of this
world, eve n make him the sovereig n of the world.
The Sufis began to ponder th e meaning of dhikr very early. They
recognized it s superior qualities as spiritua l exercise and accepte d

--- Page 195 ---
172 / THE PATH
it as the form of worship peculiar to those who strove to wander on
the path leading toward God. They therefor e tried to discover why
the dhikr should yield such wonderfu l results in the spirits of the
adepts. Kalabadh i gives an answer to this question that may well re-
flect the general feeling among the early Sufis: "People  heard their
first dhikr  when God addresse d them, saying alastu birabbikum
'Am I not your Lord?' This dhikr was secreted in their heart, even
as the fact was secreted in their intellects . So when they heard the
[Sufi] dhikr,  the secret things of their hearts appeared " (K 166). The
dhikr goe s back to the primordia l covenant , and the initiativ e
goes back to God's activity ; man respond s with his dhikr to the
eternal word s that made him truly man. Thus his dhikr,  performe d
now in time and space, brings him back to the moment of the divine
address, whe n spiritua l nourishmen t was granted to him at the
"banquet o f alast," as the Persian poets would call it. And man
answers wit h words of adoratio n and glorification , until in perma-
ment recollectio n he may reach the stage in which the subject is lost
in the object, in which recollection , recollectin g subject , and recol-
lected objec t become again one, as they were before the Day of Alast.
What has been created disappears , and the only true subject , the
everlasting God , is as He had been and will be.
This is the goal of dhikr, as formulate d by Junayd (T 2:32); cen-
turies late r the Naqshbandiyy a would teach that the end of dhikr
without word s is contemplatio n (mushahada),  in which subject and
object are , eventually , indiscernibl e (N 404). "True dhikr is that
you forget your dhikr" (L 220), says Shibli. Since even the word or
thought " O God!" implies the consciousnes s of subject and object,
the last mystery of recollectio n is complet e silence.
"Worshipping ha s ten parts, of which nine are silence." 70 Sincere
recollection i s beyond letter and thought ; rosary and beads are, for
the advance d Sufis, "like the lion painted in the batnroom " (B 509),
i.e., dead, without meaning and value. Baqli's lofty meditation s
about the dhikr, which—if genuine—i s the recollectio n of the non-
created primordia l God Himself , deserve special study (B 164). He
who has reached the last stage no longer speaks, for "when the
tongue speaks , the heart is silent" (N 396); the poets may com-
pare him to the lily, breathles s with adoratio n and silent with ten
tongues. Eve n the syllable hu, "he," or the letter ha, the last sound
of the word "Allah," the last sigh in dhikr, becomes meaningless .
70. Braune , "Futuh al-gaib,"  p. 98.

--- Page 196 ---
THE PATH / 173
In the increase d proximit y brough t about by the dhikr of the
heart the seeker becomes , eventually , completel y heart; every limb
of his is a heart recollectin g God. Qushayr i describes this state very
well in his Tartlb as-suluk,  which contains an impressiv e descriptio n
of the overwhelmin g experienc e of dhikr by which the mystic is
completely beyon d sleep and rest and lives exclusivel y in his dhikr,
which he does not want to miss for a second. The limbs partake in
such dhikr:  first they move, and then their movement s grow stronge r
until they become voices and sounds; these voices, uttering words of
dhikr, can be heard coming from the mystic's whole body, except
from his tongue. 71
We may place here the grotesqu e stories told about several Sufis
of India. Their limbs became separate d from them during the dhikr
and recollecte d God each in its own way. This experienc e is known
from Shamanism , but was apparentl y not rare among later Sufis,
mainly in the Subcontinent. 72
The Sufis—a t least since Bayezid Bistami—wer e well aware that
dhikr is still a veil (T 2:159), that the "homelan d of recollectio n is
separation"73—a leitmoti f of Niffari's prayer theology . Niffari' s
contemporary Ab u Bakr al-Wasit i said, in the same vein: "Those
who remembe r His recollectio n are more negligen t than those who
forget His recollection " (cf. N 144). For, as Hallaj put it, "recollec -
tion is the most precious pearl, and recollectio n hides Thee from
my eye." 74
Dhikr in its develope d forms is usually connecte d with some sort
of breath control . Sahl expresse d the idea that "the breaths are
counted; ever y breath that goes out without rememberin g Him is
dead, but every breath that goes out in recollectin g the Lord is
alive and is connecte d with Him." 75 One cannot determin e the
exact date s when differen t methods of breath control were adopted
into Sufism ; but everyon e who has practice d dhikr in one religiou s
tradition o r the other—b e it the Jesus prayer of the Greek monks,
71. See the analysi s by Fritz Meier, "Qusayri s Tartlb as-suluk, " Oriens 16 (1963);
and QR 70-71. See also Waliullah , Sata^dt, p. 57, no. 39.
72. Dara Shikoh, Sakinat al-auliya^,  p. 207; Aczam Tattawl , Tuhfat, p. 159, no. 146;
Khwaja Mi r Dard, cllm ul-kitdb  (Bhopal , 1309 h./1891-92) , p. 505. Even in the
strange, moder n syncretisti c book by Francis Brabazon , Stay with God: A Statement  in
Illusion o n Reality (Woombye , Queensland , 1959), p. 40, the author speaks of a certain
cAbdul Qadi r Jilanl Tanjore : "He was a 'ghous'-lik e mast—one who can separat e his
limbs fro m his body."
73. Niffari , Maw., no. 49/2.
74. Al-Hallaj , Diwan, muq. no. 18.
75. Al-Khanqahi , Guzida,  p. 53.

--- Page 197 ---
174 / THE PATH
or the Namu Amida Butsu of Amida Buddhism—know s that con-
centration withou t control of breathin g is scarcely possible . Jam!
preserved th e teaching s of his own master in the early Naqshband i
tradition—Khwaj a  cAttar said : "The purpos e in dhikr is not to speak
much; on e says in one breath three times Id ildh ilia Allah, begin-
ning from the right side, and brings it down to the heart, and brings
forth Muhammad  rasul Allah from the left side. A ninefold or
eighteenfold repetitio n in one breath is also possible " (N 390-91) .
In the later Middle Ages, especiall y in Afghanista n and India, the
habs-i dam,  holding the breath for a very long time, was practiced —
a dispute d techniqu e that may show influenc e from Indian as-
ceticism.
The peculiaritie s of dhikr were explaine d theoreticall y in later
times. Thu s Shacrani, wh o is a good interprete r of Sufism in the
Near Eas t in the sixteent h century, 76 speaks of a sevenfol d dhikr:
dhikr al-lisdn,  with the tongue; dhikr an-nafs, which is not audible
but consist s of inner movemen t and feeling; dhikr al-qalb, with the
heart, whe n the heart contemplate s God's beauty and majesty in
its inner recesses ; dhikr ar-ruh, when the meditatin g mystic per-
ceives the lights of the attributes ; dhikr as-sirr, in the innermos t
heart, whe n divine mysterie s are revealed ; dhikr al-khafiy,  the
secret recollection , which means the vision of the light of the
beauty of essentia l unity; and, finally, the dhikr akhfd al-khafl,  the
most secre t of secret, which is the vision of the Reality of Absolut e
Truth (haqq  al-yaqlri).
The Naqshband i tradition has taught the dhikr of the five lata'if,
five subtl e points in the body upon which the mystic has to concen-
trate his recollectio n until his whole being is transformed . A clear
description o f these theories as practice d in the late eighteent h
century i s given by Mir Dard (IK 112, 637). He speaks of the dhikr
qalbi, locate d in the heart at the left side of the breast, pronounce d
in love and longing ; the dhikr ruhl, performe d at the right side of
the breas t in quietud e and tranquillity ; the dhikr sirri, pronounce d
in intimacy , close to the left side of the breast; the dhikr khafawi,
performed clos e to the right corner of the breast and connecte d
with absenc e and extinctio n of the self; and the dhikr akhfawi,  in
the cente r of the breast, which is the sign of annihilatio n and con-
summation. Th e dhikr is, then, extende d to the brain in perfect con-
76. Ash-Sha cranI, Baydn  al-asrdr  (Istanbu l Universites i Kiituphanesi , Arab. 248),
fols. 88b ff.

--- Page 198 ---
THE PATH / 175
tentment (dhikr  nafsi, connecte d with the nafs qaddlsa,  the "sanc-
tified soul" ) and eventuall y permeate s the whole being, body and
soul, whe n man attains perfect recoilectednes s and peace—tha t is
the dhikr sultani, the royal recollection . Like many of the Sufis,
Dard insist s that constant practice i s required ; the dhikr is a medi-
cine for the soul, and the physicia n must learn his art by practice
rather tha n from books (IK 161).
A peculia r method of concentration , connecte d with the dhikr, is
the contemplatio n of the word Allah, written in the mystic's heart,
until he is surrounde d by the loop of the h, », in perfect lucidity
(see Appendi x i).
The Naqshband i masters considere d it useful to visit the tombs of
deceased saint s and to concentrat e upon the spirit of particula r de-
parted Sufi s in order to increase their spiritual strength . By direct-
ing one's thought to the spirit of this or that mystic—instea d of
concentrating upo n one's sheikh exclusively— a mystic might
achieve a greater sublimatio n of the spirit, accordin g to the power
of the saint in question .
The proble m of whether the true dhikr should be hidden or
spoken alou d caused a major split in the Naqshband i order in
Central Asi a in the sixteent h and seventeent h centuries ; it had grave
political consequence s resultin g in religiou s wars in Sinkiang . Yet
the traditio n was always divided ; althoug h silent dhikr was pre-
ferred by most of the Naqshband i leaders, one of the fourteenth -
century master s had answere d the question whether loud dhikr was
licit by quoting the example of the talqln, the loud recitatio n of
the professio n of faith in a dying person's ear, "and for the dervish,
every breat h is his last breath" (N 391). In retrospect , one claimed
that anothe r forerunne r of the order defende d the loud dhikr as
praiseworthy "s o the sleeping may be awakene d and the inattentiv e
may be made aware, and that by the dhikr he may come into the
path."77 Th e loud dhikr was almost a war cry against infidelity and
heedlessness, bu t it was to be used only by those whose tongues
and heart s were free from falsehoo d and slander .
The mystic s who opposed the loud dhikr relied upon the Proph-
et's word: "You do not call upon a Deaf one and not an Absent one,
but you call unto a Hearing one who is with you whereve r you are!"
They also held that the loud dhikr pronounce d by a small group
77. Fletcher , Old and New Teachings,  app. 6, from CA1I ibn Husay n Wa ciz-i
Kashifi's Rashahat  cayn al-hayat  (Kanpur , 1912), p. 38.

--- Page 199 ---
176 / THE PATH
could distur b the people in the mosque who were absorbed in silent
meditation. I n many cases, however , the loud dhikr was thought of
as a means of bringing a larger group into an ecstatic or quasi-
ecstatic state . The repetitio n of the word Allah, or of the rhythmica l
formula Id  ildh ilia Allah, accompanie d by certain movements ,
could easil y induce a state of trance. The word Allah would be
shortened unti l only its last letter, h, remained ; pronounce d ha,
it was spoken toward the left shoulder , then hu was spoken toward
the right shoulder , and hi was pronounce d with a lowering of the
head. Ofte n the Sufis would join in a halqa, a circle formed around
a qutb, "pivot"; they would put right hands on the left hands of
their neighbor s and with closed eyes repeat the shahada  until it
consisted merel y of the last h.78 Anyone who has had the opportunit y
to attend such a rhythmica l dhikr, with its increasin g tempo and
its reductio n of words until a kind of permanen t sighing is reached,
knows tha t even a noncommitte d listener is easily carried away by
the strengt h of the experience . Unfortunately , in some Muslim
countries dhikr  sessions of this type have been used lately as tourist
attractions.
Among th e differen t types of loud dhikr, that of the Rifa cl der-
vishes is best known in the West—the y are called the Howlin g Der-
vishes becaus e of the strange sounds they produce during their
dhikr meetings . One may also mention the dhikr-i arra, the "saw-
ing dhikr,"  practiced primaril y among Central Asian and Turkish
orders. Th e heavy sounds that come from the larynx are indeed
reminiscent o f a crosscut saw. The "sawing dhikr" began, allegedly ,
with Ahma d Yasawl and was, perhaps, "the Yesewiy a answer to the
ecstatic Shamanis t dances." 79
Besides bein g an excellen t means of inducin g a sort of ecstatic
state, the dhikr was also recommende d to the faithful as a means
of obtainin g heavenl y reward. Manual s of piety, like Ghazzali' s
Ihyc? ^ulum  ad-din, teach a number of dhikr formulae , along with
exact prescription s as to how often each of these formula e should
be repeate d in order to bear fruit in Paradis e (G 1:265, 302 ff).
Sura 112, the confessio n of God's Unity, is considere d especiall y
powerful fo r producin g bliss in the otherworld . Reciting the pro-
fession of faith seven thousan d times can save the mystic himself
78. fimile Dermenghem , Le culte des saints dans I'Islam Maghrebin  (Paris, 1954),
p. 321.
79. Fletcher , Old and New Teachings,  p. 16.

--- Page 200 ---
THE PATH / 177
or any other person from hellfire (N 531). These ideas were, and
still are, widely accepted by the masses. Many a pious old woman
will never get up from her ritual prayer without adding to it a num-
ber of dhikr formulae , and many a Muslim has found consolatio n
in the frequen t repetitio n of a sacred sentenc e or a divine name
from whic h he experience s comfort and strength .
The dhikr  of the divine names is extremel y importan t in this
connection. Th e fact that God has been describe d in the Koran as
possessing th e most beautifu l names forms the basis for a whole
theology o f the divine names (al-asmcf al-husna) 80—though th e mys-
tics knew that these names were not proper names applicabl e to
God, but derivativ e (M 4:217). The usual collectio n of these names
of glorificatio n comprise s ninety-nin e names. The Greates t Name is
hidden, bu t many a mystic has claimed that he possesse s it and that
it enables him to perform every kind of miracle. Others have stated
that the Greates t Name differs accordin g to the wayfarer' s station. 81
The rosary , with its thirty-thre e or ninety-nin e beads, is used for
counting th e names. They may be repeated one by one, beginnin g
with Yd Rahman  yd Rahlm,  "O Merciful , O All-compassionate, "
and endin g with Yd Sabur, "O Patient. " The Sufis have written re-
peatedly abou t the qualitie s of these divine names, which are di-
vided into lutfiyya, connecte d with God's beauty and lovingkind -
ne£S, and qahriyya,  connecte d with His wrath and majesty . These
two categorie s constantl y work together to produce the whole fabric
of the world and are mysteriousl y connecte d with human beings.
Even the difference s between mystica l teachers have been ascribed
to the various divine names they reflect.
The rules for the use of this or that divine name at a certain mo-
ment have been carefull y laid down by the Sufi leaders. The name
al-Hddl, "th e Guiding One," must work upon the adept when he
turns to God in his dhikr (N 410). The name al-Latif, "The Subtle, "
"the Kind, " should be used by the mystic in seclusio n to make his
nature subtle . Al-Hdfiz, "The Preserver, " should be used when one
tries to preserv e one's mystica l state. Al-Wadud,  "The Loving -
Beloved," make s the mystic loved by all creatures , and when it is
80. See Abu Hami d al-Ghazzall , Al-Maqsad  al-asnfp  fi shark ma^arii  asma? Allah
al-Husna, ed . Fadlou Shehad i (Beirut , 1971), on the meanin g of the divine names .
Mohammad al-Gawhary , Die Gottesnamen  im magischen  Gebrauch  in den al-Bunl
zugeschriebenen Werhen  (Bonn, 1968), discusse s the magica l use of the divine names
in the works of a thirteenth-centur y Egyptia n author .
Si.Johann Kar l Tcufel , Hamadanl,  p. 87.

--- Page 201 ---
178 / THE PATH
constantly recite d in seclusion , intimacy and divine love will in-
crease. Th e name al-Fffiq, "The Overpowering, " should never be
used by the beginner , but only by the gnostic in a high station.
These are a few example s given by Ibn cAta3 Allah , the great
teacher of the Shadhiliyy a order in Egypt (d. i3og). 82 A wrong ap-
plication o f a divine name was considere d to produce grave con-
sequences fo r the person who used it or for those close to him. It is
in this field of the dhikr of the names that the wisdom of the mysti-
cal guide is particularl y needed to instruct and supervis e the dis-
ciple who may, otherwise , be exposed to serious spiritual and mental
dangers.
In additio n to the dhikr formulae proper, the master could also
give his disciples , or those who called upon him, rather long formu-
lae to be recited after the ritual prayer or in case of special need
(wird,, aurdd,  or hizb). Many of these prayers are credited with su-
pernatural powers , and the most famous one is probably the hizb
al-bahr, attribute d to ash-Shadhil i and used mainly during travel
as a protectiv e charm.
Samcf
The goal of the mystic attained , sometimes , through con-
stant meditatio n is fand, annihilation , and subsequen t perseveranc e
in God. This final experienc e is always regarded as a free act of di-
vine grace , which might enraptur e man and take him out of himself,
often in an experienc e describe d as ecstatic. In Sufism, the term
generally translate d as "ecstasy " is wajd, which means, literally ,
"finding," i.e. , to find God and become quiet and peacefu l in find-
ing Him. In the overwhelmin g happines s of having found Him, man
may be enrapture d in ecstatic bliss. Nwyia has propose d (W 254)
calling thi s state "instasy " instead of "ecstasy " since the mystic is
not carrie d out of himself but rather into the depths of himself,
into "the ocean of the soul," as the poets might say.83
"Ecstasy i s a flame which springs up in the secret heart, and ap-
pears out of longing, and at that visitatio n (wdrid) the member s are
stirred eithe r to joy or grief" (K 106). cAttar also employe d the
image of the flame:
82. Ahma d Ibn cAta3 Alla h al-Iskandari , Miftah al-falah  wa misbdh al-arwdh
(Cairo, 1961) .
83.866 Nwyia , Ibn *AtcP Allah, pp. 276 ff.

--- Page 202 ---
THE PATH / 179
What is wajd? To become happy thanks to the true
morning,
to become fire without the presenc e of the sun.
(U4i)
In this ecstatic state, the Sufi might become absolutel y senseles s
and lose consciousnes s even for years, during which he would be
exempt fro m the prescribe d rites (B 576). In this respect, the term
wajd is the true equivalen t of ecstasy; the sixth form of the verb
wajada, "t o fLnd,"—tawdjud,  "to attempt to reach an ecstatic state
by outwar d means"—ha s been derived from it. It was this attempt-
ing to find freedom from one's self by indulgin g in singing , danc-
ing, and drugs that was often connecte d with Sufi practices and
was criticize d both by the orthodo x and by the moderat e mystics
themselves.
The proble m of samcf, "hearing, " was a major cause of difference s
among the schools. There were complicate d problem s as to whether
"listening t o music" and "dancin g movement " are genuine utter-
ances of mystical states or illegitimat e attempts to gain by one's own
effort a state that can only be granted by God; the views of the
authorities ar e clearly divided .
The samcf  is, no doubt, the most widely known expressio n of
mystical lif e in Islam. This mystica l dance was noted by the first
European visitor s to the convent s of the Mevlevis , the Whirlin g
Dervishes. Fo r the Mevlev i tarlqa is the only order in which this
whirling movemen t has been institutionalized , though it has been
practiced throughou t the world of Islam from early times. 84
In fact, dancing and whirlin g belong to the oldest religious acts
of all. Dance is the "absolut e play" and was considered , in ancient
Greece, th e movemen t of the gods—bot h Apollo and Dionysiu s have
dancing movement s that suit their particula r characters . In primi-
tive societies , dance had a magical character—ritual s to produce rain
or ensure victory were usually connecte d with dance. The encirclin g
of a sacred object—o r a person, as sometime s in the samcf— means
to partake of its magical power or to endow it with power. The rap-
84. Dunca n Black Macdonald , "Emotiona l Religion in Islam as Affected by Music
and Singing , Being a Translatio n of a Book of the Ihya?  cUliim ad-Din  of al-Ghazzall, "
Journal o f the Royal Asiatic Society, 1901. Fritz Meier, "Der Derwisch-Tanz, "
Asiatische Studien 8  (1954), on the developmen t and forms of the dance. Marijan Mol£,
"La danc e exstatiqu e en Islam," Sources  orientates  6 (1963), an excellen t study of
mystical danc e in Islam.

--- Page 203 ---
l8o / THE PATH
ture cause d by dance was well known to the Christia n church fa-
thers, wh o strictly prohibite d it. "Where there is dance, there is
Satan," sai d St. Chrysostom , and this could as well have been the
verdict of an orthodo x Muslim theologian .
The handbook s of Sufism are filled with discussion s as to whether
the samd c is permitte d or not. The conclusion s differ accordin g to
the mystica l theologian s and the orders. Orthodox y would ban
every musica l and rhythmica l movement , and some of the sober
orders, lik e the Naqshbandiyya , followed their example . Others
saw in samcf an outlet for the religiou s feeling of the pious—an d it
was this musical side of some of the fraternitie s that attracted large
masses. Thos e who longed for an emotiona l kind of worship that
ritual praye r could not really provide might find it by listening to
music or by participatin g in the dance movement .
The beginnin g of samd c is probabl y that the mystics were en-
chanted b y a beautiful voice or even by a casual word that fitted in-
to their current state of mind and thus engendere d a spiritual up-
lifting. It is well known how strongl y the Arabs respond to sound
and the rhythmica l wording of a sentence ; the recitatio n of the
Koran as performe d by a good hafiz can move large audience s to
tears. Ther e is no reason to doubt the stories told by the classical
authors tha t a moving recitatio n of a line from the scriptur e or a
worldly vers e could cause people to faint, even to die from excite-
ment. On e should not forget that in the Middle Ages in Islam
nervous disease s and mental illness were often treated by applyin g
music, as Ibn Sina recommended . The basin in the asylum at-
tached to the Great Mosque in Divrigi (Anatolia , built in 1228),
where the water produced a sweet, enthrallin g sound, or the Bayezit
Kiilliyesi i n Edirne (built 1370), with its concert-hal l arrangemen t
in the asylum, are good example s of the way music was used in
medical treatment .
It is said of al-Haddad , a blacksmit h who became a leading Sufi
in the late ninth century : "One day he was sitting in his shop listen -
ing to a blind man who was reciting the Koran in the bazaar. He
became s o absorbe d in listenin g that he put his hand into the fire,
and withou t using the pincers , drew out a piece of molten iron
from the furnace " (H 124). Stories of this kind are frequentl y
found in Islamic hagiography , and many miracles are, in fact, ex-
plained b y a state of absolute unconsciousnes s caused by listenin g
to the Koran or by performin g any kind of mental prayer. The

--- Page 204 ---
THE PATH / l8l
mystic woul d no longer feel any pain, and any surgical operatio n
could be performe d upon him withou t his being aware.
The questio n was posed, however , as to whethe r the listener—
who had to be wholly occupie d (hddir, "present" ) with his Lord-
should allo w himsel f to be enrapture d by the music or by any
sound. H e might start turning and whirlin g around , sometime s
rending hi s garments , sometime s gaining supernatura l strength .
Some hav e died in ecstasy (N 195); others are said to have just
disappeared i n the air in a flight produce d by their spinning move-
ment (N 146); or, as the legends tell, a negro would turn white as
long as his ecstatic state continue d (N 102, 164, 37).
Was this the state a Sufi should try to reach? Or was it rather the
complete self-contro l of the masters that deeply impresse d the his-
torians? Junayd' s answer to the enthusiasti c Nuri, who objecte d
to his sitting quietly while the Sufis performe d their whirling dance,
is famous : "You see the mountains—yo u think them firm, yet they
move like clouds" (Sura 27:90; N 188).
This episod e must have occurred about the year 900. Samd^khdnas,
houses in which the Sufis could listen to music and let themselve s be
drawn int o ecstatic states, were founded in Baghda d as early as the
second hal f of the ninth century . The orthodo x were scandalize d
by the sight of what took place there. They very much objected ,
among othe r things, to the rending of the garment s that frequentl y
happened i n samd c. The theoretician s of Sufism have discusse d
this topic particularl y when—a s in later times—charmin g young
boys took part in the samd c and added to the spiritua l joy. It is
said of Auhadudd m Kirmam , a Sufi of the first half of the thirteent h
century, tha t "he rent the shirts of the 'unbearded ' when he got
excited, an d danced breast to breast with them" (N 590)—certainl y
not an act of which lawyer divines could approve .
The author s of the tenth and elevent h centurie s devoted long
chapters t o the dangers inheren t in samcf:
Dancing ha s no foundatio n in the religiou s law or in the path. . . . But
since ecstati c movement s and the practice s of those who endeavou r to
induce ecstas y resembl e it, some frivolou s imitator s have indulged in it
immoderately an d have made it a religion. I have met with a number of
common peopl e who adopted Sufism in the belief that it is this dancing
and nothin g more. . . .
It is more desirabl e that beginner s should not be allowed to attend
musical concert s lest their natures become depraved . (H 416, 430)
This last sentence would be subscribe d to by all spiritual director s

--- Page 205 ---
l82 / THE PATH
in the moderat e orders, for the beginne r might experienc e merely
a sensual, not a spiritual, pleasure by listenin g to music or whirling
around hi s own axis. Abu Hafs Suhraward I has defined the stand-
point of the classica l Sufi theologian s well:
Music doe s not give rise, in the heart, to anythin g which is not already
there: so he whose inner self is attached to anythin g else than God is
stirred by music to sensual desire, but the one who is inwardl y attache d
to the love of God is moved, by hearing music, to do His will. What is
false is veiled by the veil of self and what is true by the veil of the heart,
and the veil of the self is a dark earthy veil, and the veil of the heart is a
radiant heavenl y veil.
The commo n folk listen to music accordin g to nature, and the novices
listen wit h desire and awe, while the listenin g of the saints brings them
a vision of the Divine gifts and graces, and these are the gnostics to whom
listening mean s contemplation . But finally, there is the listenin g of the
spiritually perfec t to whom, through music, God reveals Himself un-
veiled.85
For the perfect, every sound become s heavenl y music; the true
Sufi feels that every sound brings him glad tidings from his beloved,
and every word serves as a revelatio n from God. Ruzbiha n Baqli
tells a story typical of this attitude : "A certain mystic saw a group
of thieves who drank wine and played tambour . He went and
sat with them and listened to that music as if it were a sama*. The
thieves enjoye d his attitude so much that all were converted "
(B 597)-
Ruzbihan himsel f was a lover of samcf and—followin g Ibn Kha-
fif's exampl e (X 214)—taugh t that for perfect spiritual enjoymen t
three thing s were required : fine scents, a beautiful face to look at,
and a lovely voice (N 256)—th e beauty of the singer is a prerequisit e
for spiritua l happiness . Ruzbiha n even symbolize d the state of
mystical unio n as "a dance with God." 86
Ancient author s had seen, in dance, the movemen t of the deities
or of the spheres. 87 Medieva l Christian s sometime s regarded eternal
life as an eternal dance of beatitude—reflecte d so charmingl y in
some of Fra Angelico' s paintings . Geistliche  Tanzliedchen,  "spiri-
tual dancin g verses," were a well-know n genre in medieva l German
85. Smith , Readings,  no. 100.
86. See Louis Massignon , "La vie et les oeuvres de Ruzbeha n Baqli," in Studio, Ori-
entalia loanni  Pedersen  dicata septuagenario  (Copenhagen , 1953), p. 238; Henri Cor-
bin, "Quietud e et inquietud e de 1'ame dans le soufism e de Ruzbiha n Baqli de Shiraz,"
Eranos-Jahrbuch 2 7 (1958), p. 101.
87. For the whole comple x see Friedric h Heiler, Erscheinungsformen  und Wesen
der Religion  (Stuttgart , 1961), pp. 239 ff., with an extensiv e bibliography . Heiler's book
is indispensabl e for the student of phenomenolog y of religion .

--- Page 206 ---
THE PAT H / 183
mystical literatur e and are echoed, in this century , in some of the
rondas of Gabriel a Mistral , the Chilean poetess . The Muslim mys-
tics compose d such "spiritua l dancing verses" as well—Yahy a ibn
Mucadh, th e "preache r of hope" from Rayy, is credited with one of
the earlies t known example s of such songs:
The truth we have not found;
so dancing , we beat the ground !
Is dancin g reprove d in me
who wande r reproved from Thee?
In Thy valley we go around
and therefor e we beat the ground! 88
The movemen t of the soul in its approac h to God is sometimes ,
though rarely , describe d as a heavenly dance.
In the poetry of Jalaluddi n Rumi this enthusiasti c dance has
found its most eloquen t expression . His verses often echo the strong
rhythm o f the dancin g movemen t later institutionalize d by the
order of the Whirlin g Dervishes. 89 Rumi sees that "the House of
Love is made completel y of music, of verses and songs" (D 332), and
that the heavenl y beloved circumambulate s this house, carrying his
rebab wit h him and singing intoxicatin g tunes (D 2395). For Rumi,
music wa s the sound of the doors of Paradise , as a lovely legend
tells: "A certain man objecte d to Ruml's statemen t and said that he
disliked th e sound of scratchin g doors. Whereupo n the master re-
plied: 'Yo u hear the doors when they close—I hear them when they
are opened ' " (N 462).
The samd c is, for him, nourishmen t of the soul (just as the dhikr
was previousl y described)—thi s expressio n forms part of the last
Turkish poe m in the Mevlev i ritual, in which it is repeated several
times. Whereve r the lover touches  the ground with his dancing feet,
the water of life will spring out of the darkness, 90 and when the
name of the beloved is uttered , "even the dead start dancing in
their shrouds " (D 1978). Rumi has compare d the whirlin g move-
ment of the dervishe s to worker s treading on grapes, an act that
brings the spiritua l wine into existenc e (D 624). The dancing lover
88. A 10:61; trans. A. J. Arberry , in Suftsm:  An Account  of the Mystics  of Islam
(London, 1950) , p. 62.
89. Hellmu t Ritter, "Der Reigen der 'Tanzende n Derwische, ' " Zeitschrift  fur
Vergleichende Musikwissenschaft,  i (1933); Ritter, "Die Mevlanafeie r in Konya vom
11-17. Dezembe r 1960," Oriens 25 (1962), is a detailed descriptio n of the ritual.
90. Maulan a Jalaladdi n Rumi, Rubd'-iyat,  ms. Esat Ef. no. 2693, fol. 322 a 5.

--- Page 207 ---
184 / THE PATH
is higher than the spheres , for the call to samcf comes from Heaven
(M 2:1942) ; he may be compare d to the particle of dust that spins
around th e sun and thus experience s a strange sort of union, for
without th e gravitatio n of the sun it would not be able to move-
just as man cannot live without turning around the spiritua l center
of gravity , around God.
Once the fetters of the body are broken by means of enthusiasti c
dance, the soul is set free and realizes that everythin g created takes
part in the dance—th e spring breeze of love touches the tree so that
the branches , flower buds, and stars start whirling in the all-
embracing mystica l movement .
True samd c is also "a dance in blood"—a n allusion to the legend
that Halla j danced in his fetters on the way to the place of execu-
tion; the last step of spiritual freedom has often been describe d as
a dance in fetters (M 3:96). The sama c means to die to this world
and to be revived in the eternal dance of the free spirits around a
sun that neither rises nor sets. Fand and baqd, annihilatio n and
eternal lif e in God, can thus be represente d in the movemen t of the
mystical danc e as understoo d by Rumi and his followers :
Sound drum an d mellow flute, resoundin g Allah Hu!
Dance, rudd y dawn, in gladness boundin g Allah Hu!
Sound exalte d in the centre, o thou streamin g light!
Soul of all wheelin g planets roundin g Allah Hu!
Who know s love's mazy circling , ever lives in God,
For death , he knows, is love abounding : Allah Hu! 91
The preeterna l covenan t of the Day of Alastu is represented , by
Rumi, by the imag e of sama c:
A call reached Not-Being ; Not-Bein g said : "Yes [bald],
yes,
I shall put my foot on that side, fresh and green and
joyful!"
It heard the alast; it came forth running and intoxicated ,
It was Not-Bein g and became Being [manifeste d in] tu-
lips and willows and sweet basil.
(D 1832)
91. Willia m Hastie , The Festival  of Spring from the "Divan"  of Jeldleddin  (Glas-
gow, 1903) , no. 6.

--- Page 208 ---
THE PATH / 185
The nonexisten t possibilitie s were endowe d with existenc e by
the divine address; this sound enrapture d them into a dance that
led into the beautifu l world full of flowers and scents, just as the
sound of the divine voice as heard through the medium of mu-
sic uplift s the soul to previousl y unknow n worlds of spiritua l
happiness.
Ruml's imager y is almost unlimite d when he talks about the
beauty an d force of samd*. In ever new images he describe d this
movement induce d by the vision of the beloved , who himself may
dance on the screen of the lover's heart in the hour of ecstasy. Othe r
poets and mystics have followed his example both in applyin g the
symbolism o f music and dance to their poetry and by practicin g
samcf wit h their disciples . Notwithstandin g the orthodo x aversion
to this aspect of mystica l life, it was too attractiv e to be stopped .
Even a sober mystic of the Naqshbandiyy a in Delhi like Mir Dard
felt compelle d to write a book in defense of music and used to
gather musician s once or twice a week to play melodie s for him and
his followers—withou t the dancing movement , however , and in
strict discipline .
In India, samcf was advocate d by the Chishti order. Others fol-
lowed thei r example,  and one of the saints of Thatta in Sind, clsa
Jund Allah , in the seventeent h century even dared to equate samd c
with ritua l prayer. 92 Others would call the samcf the "ascensio n of
the saints." 93 When one mystic got a negative answer to his question
whether ther e would be samd^ in Paradise , he sighed: "What, then,
have we to do with Paradise?" 94
The activitie s of the Mevlev i dervishe s in Turkey , along with
those of the other orders, were banned by Atatiirk in 1925; since
1954 they have been allowed to perform the samd c on the occasion
of the anniversar y of Rumi's death on Decembe r 17 in Konya,
though no t in the central sanctuar y (they have even performe d
outside th e country) . Still, the admiratio n for this ritual is deeply
rooted in many Turkish families , and a modern Turkis h poem
reflects th e feeling of ecstasy that is so typical fo r the Sufis and that
has been echoed in so many verses and hymns. Asaf Halet Qelebi
92. Icjazul Haq q Quddusi , Tadhkira-yi  suftya-yi Sind (Karachi , 1959), p. 156.
93. Bedil RohriwarS , Dlwdn, ed. cAbdul Husay n Musaw i (Hyderabad , Sind, 1954),
P- 297-
94. Qani c, Tuhfat al-kiram,  p. 436; see H. T. Sorley, Shah Abdul Latif of Ehit: His
Poetry, Life,  and Times (1940; reprint ed., Oxford, 1966).

--- Page 209 ---
l86 / THE PATH
(d. 1958) is, to my knowledge , the last poet to genuinel y interpre t
this feeling: 95
The trees , donning their dancing gowns
supplicate i n love
Mevlana
The imag e in me
is a different image
how man y stars fall
into my interior dance!
I whirl and I whirl
the skies whirl as well
roses blosso m out of my face
The trees in the garden, in sunshin e
"He create d Heaven and earth"
the serpent s listen to the song of the reed
in the trees donning their dancing gowns
The meadow' s children , intoxicate d
Heart
they call you
I look, smiling, at suns
which hav e lost their way . . .
I fly, I fly
the skies fly ....
95. Asaf Halet (Jelebi, He (Istanbul , 1951).

--- Page 210 ---
4. MAN an d HIS
PERFECTION
SOME NOTES ON SUFI PSYCHOLOGY
The positio n of man in Islam, and especiall y in Sufism,
has been a subject of controvers y among Western scholars . Some of
them hav e held that man, as "slave of God," has no importanc e
whatsoever befor e the Almight y God; he almost disappears , loses
his personality , and is nothing but an instrumen t of eternal fate.
The concep t of "humanism " of which Europea n culture is so proud
is, accordin g to these scholars , basically alien to Islamic thought .
Others hav e sensed in the developmen t of later Sufism an inheren t
danger tha t might result in an absolute subjectivism , because the
human personalit y is, so to speak, "inflated " to such an extent that
it is considere d the microcosm , the perfect mirror of God. The
doctrine o f the Perfect Man (see chapter 6) seemed, to some orien-
talists, extremel y dangerou s for Islamic anthropology—n o less dan-
gerous tha n the allegedly humiliatin g role of man as "slave of God."
It is, in fact, not easy to give an account of mystical anthropolog y
in Islam, 1 since it is as many-side d as Islam itself; the difference s
i. Nichola s Heer, "A Sufi Psychologica l Treatise, " Moslem World 51 (1961), a trans-
lation of a text by al-Haki m at-Tirmidh i that was edited in Cairo in 1958. For later
times see J. M. S. Baljon, "Psycholog y as Apprehende d and Applied by Shah Wall
Allah Dihlawi, " Ada Orientalia  Neerlandica,  1971.
187

--- Page 211 ---
l88 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
between th e earliest and the later mystica l currents are consider -
able. It is possible , therefore , to point to only a few facets of the
problem tha t seem importan t for the understandin g of "man" in
Sufism, withou t even attemptin g to sketch most of the lines in the
picture.
According t o the Koran, man was created "by God's hands" (Sura
38:75), an idea that the tradition elaborated : God kneaded Adam's
clay forty days before He gave him life and spirit by breathin g
into him with His own breath (Sura 15:29; 38:72). "That means,
His Presenc e was operativ e 40,000 years upon him" {B 545), as
Baqli interpret s this tradition . And he continues : "The form of
Adam is the mirror of both worlds. Whateve r has been put into
these two kingdoms , was made visible in human form. 'And we will
show them Our signs in the horizon s and in themselves ' " (Sura
41:53' B 437)-
This creatio n myth assigns an extremel y high position to man:
he is in every respect God's perfect work, living through His breath,
and is, thus, almost a mirror reflectin g God's qualities . As the tra-
dition says , "He created Adam in His image" (*ala suratihi).  Adam,
seen from this angle, is the prototyp e of the Perfect Man; he was
blessed wit h the special grace of knowledge : "He taught Adam the
names," say s the Koran (Sura 2:31). To know a thing's name means
to be able to rule it, to use it for one's self: by virtue of his knowl-
edge of the names, Adam becam e master over all created things.
Yet the simple Koranic statemen t was sometime s explaine d to imply
that God had granted Adam the knowledg e of the divine names
reflected i n creation , which he might "use" in his prayers. Adam
became, thus , the ^allamcfl-asmff-beg,  as Rumi says, with a remark-
able combinatio n of Arabic and Turkish component s (M 1:1234) ,
"the princ e of He taught the names." God made Adam his khalifa,
his vicegerent , on earth and ordered the angels to prostrat e them-
selves befor e him—ma n is superior to the angels (cf. H 239), who
have not been given the secret of the names and who do nothing
but worshi p God in perfect obedience , whereas man enjoys—o r
suffers from—th e choice between obedienc e and rebellio n (though
this choic e may be limited by predestination) . Man was entruste d
with the amdna, the "trust" (Sura 33:72) that Heaven and earth
refused to carry—a trust that has been differentl y interpreted : as
responsibility, fre e will, love, or the power of individuation . Yet

--- Page 212 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 189
the Sufis often longed for their true home, for the time and place
of their lofty primeva l state:
We were in heaven, we were the companion s of angels—
when will we return there again?
(D 463)
This remembranc e of the paradisiaca l days accompanie s them in
this vale of tears and leads them back from their worldly exile.
In man, creation reaches its final point. One Bektash i poet wrote:
This univers e is a tree—man became its fruit.
That whic h was intended is the fruit—d o not think it
is the tree!
(BO 118)
Later traditio n ascribed to God the words kuntu kanzan makh-
fiyan, "I was a hidden treasure , and I wanted to be known, so I
created th e world." God, in His eternal loneliness , wanted to be
known, so he created a world in which man is the highest mani-
festation. Ma n is the microcos m and is created—agai n accordin g to
a hadith qudsl—tor  God's sake, who in turn created everythin g for
man's sake .
The Kora n has, indeed, assigned a very high place to man, with-
out enterin g into detailed discussion . The Sufis, however , dwelt in-
tently upo n the differen t aspects of man. The operation s of divine
omnipotence ar e carried out on man; he is, as Rumi says in a
poignant image , "the astrolab e of the qualitie s of highness " (M
6:3138-43). Th e mystics have found numerou s allusion s in the
Koran to prove man's lofty rank. One of their favorite verses in this
respect is : "And we shall show you our signs on the horizon s and
in yourselves—d o you not see?" (Sura 41:53), a verse that they in-
terpreted a s God's order to look into their own hearts to find the
source of knowledg e and, eventually , the divine beloved , who is
"closer tha n the jugular vein" (Sura 50:16).
From this feeling the hadlth "man carafa nafsahu faqad carafa
rabbahu," "wh o knows himself knows his Lord," must have devel-
oped; it may originall y have been an adaptatio n of the Delphic
gnoti theauton,  "know yourself. " The mystica l theorists have relied
heavily upo n this tradition : to know one's innermos t heart means
to discove r the point at which the divine is found as the dulcis

--- Page 213 ---
1QO / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
hospes animae,  the meeting point of the human and the divine.
The hadith  has been interprete d differently . One of the finest alle-
gories eve r written is by Ruml, who tells the story of Ayaz, Mahmud
of Ghazna' s favorite slave, who looked every mornin g at the out-
worn shoe s and shabby clothes he wore before Mahmu d elected
him for himself; it was necessar y for him to remembe r his former
lowly stat e so that he could appreciat e the bounty that his lord had
bestowed upo n him (M 5:2113) . Thus, conclude s Ruml, man
should likewis e remembe r how weak he was created, and then he
will recogniz e his nothingnes s before God, who gives him every-
thing out of grace.
Most mystics , however , would interpre t the hadith as a conden-
sation of the basic experienc e of the mystical path as a way inward,
an interiorizatio n of experience , a journey into one's own heart
(CL 93). This has been beautifull y describe d by cAttar in the
Musibatnama, wher e the hero eventuall y finds his peace in the
ocean of the soul.
That God resides in the loving heart is expresse d by another
favorite tradition : "Heave n and earth contain Me not, but the
heart of my faithful servant contains Me." The heart is the dwelling
place of God; or it is, in other terminology , the mirror in which
God reflect s Himself . But this mirror has to be polished by con-
stant asceticis m and by permanen t acts of loving obedienc e until
all dust and rust have disappeare d and it can reflect the primordia l
divine light .
Another imag e often used to show how man has to prepare for
this state of "finding " is that of "breaking. " One hadith qudsi
attests: "I am with those whose hearts are broken for My sake."
The them e of breaking for the sake of constructio n is in full accord
with asceti c practice s as a preparator y stage. Junayd' s statemen t
that "God is affirmed more by Not-bein g than by Being" (P 1:45)
led Massigno n to the conclusio n that the general tendency of Islamic
theology i s "to affirm God rather through destructio n than through
construction" ( P 2:631). The nafs has to be brcken, the body has
to be broken, and the heart, too, has to be broken and everythin g
in it naughte d so that God can build a new mansio n for Himself
in it. For the ruined house contains treasures—suc h treasure s can
only be found by digging up the foundatio n (as the story of Khidr
in Sura 18 tells).

--- Page 214 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 1Q1
Wherever ther e is a ruin, there is hope for a treasure -
why do you not seek the treasure of God in the wasted
heart?
(D 141)
cAttar ofte n spoke of "breaking " as a means of attaining peace and
unity—be i t the broken millstone , which no longer turns in endless
restlessness ( U 149), or the puppet-playe r in the Ushturname,  who
breaks all the figures he has used and puts them back into the box
of unity (V 137). In later Sufi poetry, mainly in the Indo-Persia n
style aroun d 1700—whe n all the leading poets were under the in-
fluence of the Naqshbandiyy a tarlqa—the  word shikast,  "broken, "
became a  favorite term. Perhaps , in a period in which Muslim
India brok e down completely, the y hoped to find some consolatio n
in the idea that breaking is necessar y for a new beginning .
The mysti c may find the figure of the friend who dwells within
the heart emptied of everything , may find in its ruin the hidden
treasure an d discover , in a jubilant experience , "What I have never
found, I found in man!" (Y 79). The utterance s of a number of
enthusiastic mystic s who had reached this state have often opened
the way to a boundles s feeling of all-embracin g unity, which, along
with the theories of Ibn cArabi, coul d easily lead to a state in which
the boundar y between man and God seemed forgotten . However ,
the Lord remains Lord, the slave, slave—thi s is the generall y ac-
cepted viewpoin t of moderat e Sufism.
Sufi psychology , like everythin g else in Sufism, is based on Ko-
ranic ideas—th e ideas on the nafs, the lowest principle of man, have
already bee n mentioned . Higher than the nafs is the qalb, "heart,"
and the ruh, "spirit." 2 This tripartitio n forms the foundatio n of
later, mor e complicate d systems; it is found as early as the Koranic
commentary b y Jacfar as-Sadiq . He holds that the nafs is peculiar
to the zdlim, "tyrant," the qalb to the muqtasid,  "moderate, " and
the ruh to the sabiq, "precedin g one, winner" ; the zdlim loves God
for his own sake, the muqtasid  loves Him for Himself , and the
sabiq annihilate s his own will in God's will (W 17). Bayezld BistamI ,
al-Hakim at-Tirmidhi , and Junayd have followed this tripartition .
Kharraz, however , inserts between nafs and qalb the element tabc,
"nature," th e natural function s of man (W 240-42) .
2. See Louis Massignon , "Le 'coeur' (al-qalb) dans la priere et la meditatio n musul-
mane," Etudes  carmelitaines  9 (1950).

--- Page 215 ---
1Q2 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
At almos t the same time in history , Nuri saw in man four differ-
ent aspect s of the heart, which he derived in an ingeniou s way
from the Koran:
Sadr, "breast, " is connecte d with Islam (Sura 39:23);
qalb, "heart, " is the seat of Imdn, "faith" (Sura 49:7; 16:106);
fifdd, "heart, " is connecte d with ma^rifa, "gnosis" (Sura 53:11); and
lubb, "innermos t heart," is the seat of tauhld (Sura 3:190) (W 321).
The Sufi s often add the elemen t of sirr, the innermos t part of the
heart in which the divine revelatio n is experienced . Jacfar intro -
duced, in an interestin g comparison , reason, caql, as the barrier
between nafs  and qalb— "the barrie r which they both cannot tran-
scend" (Sur a 55:20), so that the dark lower instinct s cannot jeopar-
dize the heart's purity (W 163).
Each of these spiritua l centers has its own functions , and cAmr
al-Makki ha s summe d up some of the early Sufi ideas in a lovely
myth:
God create d the hearts seven thousan d years before the bodies and kept
them in the station of proximit y to Himself and He created the spirits
seven thousan d years before the hearts and kept them in the garden of
intimate fellowshi p (uns) with Himself , and the consciences—th e inner-
most part—H e created seven thousan d years before the spirits and kept
them in the degree of union (wasl) with Himself . Then he imprisone d
the conscienc e in the spirit and the spirit in the heart and the heart in
the body. Then He tested them and sent prophets , and then each began
to seek its own station. The body occupie d itself with prayer, the heart
attained t o love, the spirit arrived at proximit y to its Lord, and the in-
nermost par t found rest in union wit h Him. 3
Later Sufi s have elaborate d these comparativel y simple teaching s
into a minute system of correspondence s in which every spiritua l
experience i s connecte d with its respectiv e recipien t part.
In the same way, the differen t kinds of revelation s (kashf] that
are grante d to the Sufis have been classifie d on the basis of the
different level s of consciousnes s on which they occur and whethe r
they lead to intellectua l or intuitiv e knowledg e of the divine. A
late mystic , relying upon the traditiona l terminology , classifie s the
revelations a s follows :
a) Kashf kaunl, revelatio n on the plane of the created things, is a result
of pious actions and purification s of the lower soul; it becomes manifes t
in dreams and clairvoyance .
b) Kashf ildhl, divine revelation , is a fruit of constan t worship and
polishing o f the heart; it results in the knowledg e of the world of spirits
3. Margare t Smith, Readings  from the Mystics of Islam (London , 1950), no. 29.

--- Page 216 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 193
and in cardiognos y ["soul-reading" ] so that the mystic sees the hidden
things an d reads the hidden thoughts .
c) Kashf  caqll, revelatio n by reason, is essentiall y the lowest grade of in-
tuitive knowledge ; it can be attained by polishin g the moral faculties ,
and can be experience d by the philosopher s as well.
d) Kashf imdnl, revelatio n throug h faith, is the fruit of perfect faith
after man has acquire d proximit y to the perfection s of prophethood ;
then he will be blessed by direct divine addresses ; he talks with the an-
gels, meet s the spirits of the prophets , sees the Night of Might and the
blessings o f the month of Ramada n in human form in the cdlam al-
mithdl. (I K 443-44 )
On the whole, these last specification s belong to a later develop -
ment of Sufism; however , the differen t degrees of nonrationa l reve-
lation of supernatura l realities have been accepte d by all the mystics
from earl y times. They clearly distinguishe d the ilm ladunni (cf.
Sura 18:65), tne "wisdo m that is with and from God" and is granted
to the gnostic by an act of divine grace, from norma l knowledge .
They "tasted " (dhauq]  in this experienc e new levels of reveale d
wisdom tha t were not to be attained by a scientific approac h or by
theological reasoning .
GOOD AND EVIL: THE ROLE OF SATAN
One of the most fascinatin g aspects of mystical psycholog y
in Islam is the way in which the Sufis have dealt with Satan, the
power of evil. Satan, accordin g to the Koran either a fallen angel
or a jinn created from fire, plays a dominan t role in the story of
creation a s told in the Koran (Sura 2:28-34) . Accordin g to some
mystics, h e was the teacher of the angels and in this role was even
made the subject of a Bengali Muslim poem of the early seventeent h
century, th e Ibllsname  by Sayyid Sultan. 4 The author says that the
angels wer e ordered to honor Iblis even after God had cursed him,
since he had been their teacher—th e same applies to the disciple
who has to honor and obey his sheikh, even if the sheikh is a veri-
table satan .
A well-know n traditio n says that Satan sits in the blood of Adam's
children (cf . S 471), and thus he could be equated with the nafs,
the lower principle , the "flesh." But never in the history of Islam
has Satan been given absolut e power over men: he can tell them
lies and seduce them as he did with Adam, but they have the pos-
sibility to resist his insinuation s (Iqbal's Satan sadly complain s that
4. Enamu l Haqq, Muslim Bengali Literature  (Karachi , 1957), p. 119.

--- Page 217 ---
1Q4 /  MA N AND HIS PERFECTIO N
it is much too easy for him to seduce people) . Iblis never become s
"evil as such"; he always remain s a creature of God and, thus, a
necessary instrumen t in His hands.
In some mystica l circles somethin g like a rehabilitatio n of Satan
was attempted . It seems that this idea was first formulate d by
Hallaj: Sata n boasts of having served God for thousand s of years
before Adam' s creation , and his pride in being created from fire
makes hi m refuse God's order to prostrat e himself before Adam,
newly create d from clay. Hallaj recognize s only two true mono-
theists in the world, Muhamma d and Satan—bu t Muhamma d is
the treasure r of divine grace, whereas Iblis has become the trea-
surer of divine wrath. In Hallaj' s theory, Satan become s "more
monotheist tha n God Himself " (R 538). For God's eternal will is
that no one should be worshipe d except Him, and Satan refuses
to fall down before a created being, notwithstandin g God's explicit
order. As Hallaj translate s his outcry in a famous quatrain : "My
rebellion mean s to declare Thee Holy!" Iblis was kept between will
and order , and
He was thrown in the water, his hands tied to his back,
and He said to him: "Beware lest you become wet."
This tragi c situatio n of Satan has inspired a number of poets
to express their sympathie s with him whose predicament , in a cer-
tain sense , foreshadowe d the difficultie s man would have to under-
go in this world. The most beautifu l poem in this respect is that
by Sana DI (SD 871)—a first great "Lamen t of Satan," in which the
fallen angel , whose "heart was the nest for the Simurg h of love,"
complains o f God's ruse: He had intende d from eternit y to condem n
him and made Adam the outwar d cause for his fall:
He put the hidden snare into my way-
Adam wa s the grain in the ring of this snare.
He wante d to give me the mark of curse—
He did what He wanted—th e earthen Adam was but an
excuse.
To be sure, Satan had read on the Well-preserve d Tablet that one
creature woul d be cursed by God—bu t how could he, with his
thousands o f treasure s of obedience , expect that it would be he
himself? Ther e are few poems that show the tragic greatnes s of
Iblis bette r than this little-know n ghazal b y the master of Ghazna .

--- Page 218 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 195
SanaDI ma y have been influence d in his thought by his elder
contemporary Ahma d Ghazzal i (d. 1126), the classical representativ e
of Satan's rehabilitation , who dared to say: "Who does not learn
tauhid fro m Satan, is an infidel" 5—a remar k that infuriate d the
orthodox bu t found an echo in many later Sufi writings . cAttar
follows hi m in his approach—h e too sees in Iblis the perfect mono-
theist and lover, who, once cursed by God, accepts this curse as a
robe of honor; for (in the true Hallajia n tradition) , "to be cursed
by Thee, is a thousand times dearer to me than to turn my head
away from Thee to anythin g else" (cf. MT 217). Iblis becomes here
the model of the perfect lover, who obeys every wish of the beloved
and prefer s eternal separatio n willed by the beloved to the union for
which he longs. Centurie s later Sarmad , the Jewish convert to
Sufism (execute d 1661) in Mogul India, shocked the orthodo x with
a quatrain in which he called men to imitate Satan:
Go, learn the method of servantshi p from Satan:
Choose on e qibla and do not prostrate yourself before
anything else .
(AP 238)
Even the poetry of the eighteenth-centur y mystic Shah cAbduDl-
Latif in the remote provinc e of Sind calls the reader to admire
Iblis as the one true lover and to follow his example— a verse that
has cause d considerabl e puzzlemen t to the commentators. 6
Other mystics , however , have seen in Iblis's refusal to fall down
before Ada m not only an act of disobedience—th e prototyp e of all
disobedience i n the world—bu t an act resulting from lack of love.
Iblis was, as Rumi has repeatedl y asserted , one-eyed : He saw only
Adam's form , made of dust, and therefor e boasted , "I am better
than he," fire being superior to clay. But he overlooke d the decisive
fact that God had breathe d His breath into man and formed him
according t o His image (M 4:1617) . He is, thus, a representativ e of
one-eyed intellectualism , lacking in that divine love that is Adam's
heritage, a s Rumi (M 4:1402 ) and, followin g him, Iqbal have
shown.
Satan become s a tragic figure, lost, hopeless , and lonely, some-
5. Merlin S. Swartz, Ibn al-Jawzi's  "kitab al-qussds  wcfl-mudhakkirin"  (Beirut ,
1971), 221 .
6. Sur Yaman  Kalyan;  see Anneraari e Schimmel , "Schah cAbdul Latlf' s Beschrei -
bung des wahren Sufi," in Festschrift  fur Fritz Meier, comp. Richard Gramlic h (Wies-
baden, 1974) .

--- Page 219 ---
106 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
times visualize d by the mystics in a sad attire or playing melanchol y
songs of separation . The manifol d aspects of Satan develope d
throughout th e centurie s by the Sufis have been echoed, in our day,
in the work of Muhamma d Iqbal, whose multicolore d picture of
Satan is quite unusual. 7 He sees in him the lover as well as the
intellectual, th e monotheis t and the spirit of evil who longs to be
overcome b y the perfect man (faithfu l to the Propheti c tradition ,
"My shaytan  has become Muslim" ) and to be broken in order to
find salvation . Thus, he will eventuall y prostrat e himself before
man, who proves stronger than he. On the other hand, Iqbal has
also employe d the more commo n image of Satan the seducer , the
materialist, an d the destroyer .
The problem s of Satanolog y are closely connecte d with those of
good and evil and, thus, with predestinatio n and free will. These
problems constitute d the subject of the first theologica l discussion s
in early Islamic thought and have never ceased to puzzle the minds
of the pious. For if there is no agent but God, what is the role of
man? To what extent can his deeds and actions be attribute d to
him? Wha t is the derivatio n of evil? To what extent is man caught,
like the mythica l Satan, between divine will and divine order?
"Predestination (qadar]  is the secret of God with which neither
a close angel nor a sent messenge r is acquainted. " It is, as Ruzbiha n
Baqli says , quoting this alleged hadlth,  "the divine mystery from
the time before creation , which nothing created in time can ever
hope to solve" (B 175). The mystics knew well that an unquestione d
acceptance o f all-embracin g predestinatio n could produce danger-
ous consequence s for human activitie s and faith. The early ascetics,
though, wer e never certain about their fate. In spite of their supere-
rogative prayers , vigils, and fasts, they constantl y dreaded the Day
of Judgmen t that might lead them to Hell, accordin g to God's
eternal decree : "These to Hell, and I do not care, and those to
Paradise, an d I do not care"— this hadlth is quoted even by Ghaz-
zali to point to the inscrutabilit y of the divine will.
Later mystic s tried to solve the problem by the introductio n of
the principl e of love: the will of someone who has reached annihila -
tion throug h asceticism , suffering , and love persists in God's will.
Then man no longer attribute s any actions to himself but lives and
7. Alessandr o Bausani , "Satan nell'oper a filosofico-poetic a di Muhamma d Iqbal,"
Rivista degli  Studi Orientali  30 (1957); Annemari e Schimmel , "Die Gestal t des Satan
in Muhamma d Iqbal's Werk," Kairos,  1963, fasc. 2.

--- Page 220 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 1Q7
works, so to speak, out of the divine will, thus experiencin g the
jabr mahmud,  "agreeabl e constraint. "
More outspoke n than other Sufis, Ruml pondered the incompati -
bility of piety and the acceptanc e of a blind predestination . He
charmingly tol d the story of a man who climbed a tree and ate the
fruit, assurin g the gardene r that "this is God's garden, and I am
eating fro m God's fruit given by Him." The gardener , thereupon ,
nicely thrashe d him "with the stick of God" until the thief had to
acknowledge tha t the transgressio n was done by his own will, not
by God's order (M 5:3077-100) .
In the same line of thought , Ruml refuses to believe in the
generally accepte d explanatio n of the hadith "qad jaffcfl-qalam,"
"the pen has dried up," which means that nothing once decreed
and writte n on the Well-preserve d Tablet can ever be changed .
This hadith,  he thinks, says that God has ordered once and for all
that the good deeds of the faithful shall never be lost, but not that
good and evil actions are of equal value (M 5:3131-53) .
Dress in that material whic h you yourself have woven,
and drink the product of what you have planted.
(M 5:3181 )
This hadith  is not an invitatio n to laziness but rather a charge
to work harder and to act in perfect sincerity so that one's service
becomes pure r and thus more acceptabl e (M 5:3113) . For,
One beats a cow when it refuses to carry the yoke,
but not because it does not put on wings!
(M 5:3110 )
One may also argue that man's acting in accordanc e with his
God-given natur e constitutes , in itself, an identificatio n with the
divine purpos e in creation : whateve r God brings into existenc e
and allow s to be done must be useful for some good end, even
though ma n may not be able to see the final goal of his own action.
Man is, as the tradition says, "betwee n the two fingers of the Merci-
ful." Tha t means that each action has two faces, each state of
constraint ha s in itself an extension , just as in the very act of
breathing extensio n and compressio n are united. In the same way,
God manifest s Himsel f through His differen t and contradictor y
attributes an d names, and the manifestatio n of the attribut e of
majesty is as necessar y as that of kindness for the maintenanc e of

--- Page 221 ---
ig8 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
the curren t of creation . Man sees only the outward phenomen a
and takes them at face value but rarely thinks of the hidden power
that bring s them into existence . He sees—to use Rumi's favorite
comparison—the dus t but not the wind; he looks at the foam but
not at the bottom of the sea. The divine is the coincidentia  oppo-
sitorum, bu t in order to become known it has to show itself in
contrasting form s and colors, for the absolut e light is too strong
to be perceive d and must be broken throug h materia l media.
Through th e opposite of light one recognize s the light (M i: 1133).
Thus, the mystic can understan d that God's wrath is mercy in
disguise, an d that the pain and punishmen t that He inflicts upon
those who love Him are necessar y for their spiritua l growth—jus t
as bitter medicin e is necessar y for the sick. How often is man
misled by the delusion of outward appearances :
How man y enmitie s were friendship ,
how many destruction s were renovation !
(M 5:186)
For God hides His grace in wrath and His wrath in grace. And
everything create d shows this double face:
The cold wind became a murderer for the people of cAd,
but for Solomon it served as a porter.
(M 6:2660 )
Poison is the life elemen t for the serpent, but it carries death to
others (M 5:3295) . The figure of Khidr, whose seemingl y illogical
actions ha d a deep meaning , can be understoo d from this viewpoint .
On the other hand, the Sufi should not only accept good and evil
as coming from God and therefor e equally welcome , he should
also be careful that no ruse be hidden in grace. Constant watchful -
ness is required to keep the soul safe.
The grea t theosophist s of later centurie s have devoted detailed
studies to the will and knowledg e of God, discussin g minutel y the
relation o f the human to the divine will. A good example is Jill's
thought, a s explaine d so excellentl y by Reynold A. Nicholson . But
even the most learned systems could not eliminat e the painful di-
lemma of predestinatio n and free will; for this problem cannot be
solved by intellec t but only, if at all, by love. Hallaj, Rumi, and
their follower s understoo d that the jabr mahmud,  the "higher
predestination," a s Iqbal calls it, can be achieve d not simply by

--- Page 222 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 199
accepting a  given situatio n but by actively conformin g with God's
will throug h love and prayer. Once such a change of human will
is achieve d by absolute and loving surrender , the mystic can hope
for new doors to open before him on his spiritua l path into the
depths of God—
And if He closes before you all the ways and passes,
He will show a hidden way which nobody knows.
(D 765)
SAINTS AN D MIRACLE S
"You mus t know that the principl e and foundatio n of
Sufism an d knowledg e of God rest on saintship " (H 210), says
Hujwiri, an d three centurie s after him Jaml opened his discussion s
about the history of Sufism with a paragrap h on saintship . In fact,
the theorie s of saintship , wildya, have formed one theme that has
been discusse d by the Sufis since the late ninth century , when
Kharraz, Sah l at-Tustarl , and al-Haki m at-Tirmidh i wrote their
essays on this subject.
The word usually translate d as "saint," wall, means "someon e
who is under special protection , friend"; it is the attribut e given
by the Shiites to CAH, the wait Allah par excellence . The word is,
as Qushayr i points out, both active and passive: a wall is one whose
affairs are led (tuwulliya)  by God and who perform s (tawalla)
worship an d obedienc e (cf. N 6). The auliyc? Allah, the "friend s
of God," are mentione d in the Koran several times, the most famous
occasion bein g Sura 10:63: "Verily, the friends of God, no fear is
upon them nor are they sad."
The concep t of wildya develope d during the early centurie s of
Sufism. A n authorit y of the early tenth century , Abu cAbdallah
as-Salimi, define d the saints as "those who are recognizabl e by the
loveliness o f their speech, and fine manners , and submission , and
generosity, showin g little opposition , and acceptin g the excuse of
everyone wh o excuses himself before them, and perfect mildnes s
towards al l creatures , the good as well as the bad" (N 121). Thus,
the ideal Sufi is here called a wall.
The wildyat  cdmma, th e "genera l saintship " common to all the
sincere faithfu l (and it is to that wildya that Salimi's statemen t
points), is usually distinguishe d from the wildya khdssa, that of the
advanced mystics , "who have become annihilate d in God and

--- Page 223 ---
20O /  MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
remain throug h Him, and the wall is he who has been annihilate d
in Him and lives in Him" (N 5). From among those perfect mys-
tics, a whole hierarch y of saints has evolved since at least the time
of Tirmidhi . The highest spiritua l authorit y is the qutb, "axis,
pole," or ghauth,  "help." He is surrounde d by three nuqabff,
"substitutes," fou r autdd, "pillars, " seven abrdr, "pious," forty
abdal, "substitutes, " three hundred akhydr, "good," and four thou-
sand hidde n saints. Some authorities , e.g., Ibn cArabi, clai m that
there are seven abdal, one for each of the seven climates; 8 Ruzbiha n
Baqli expresse d similar ideas. The qutb is the virtual center of
spiritual energ y upon whom the well-bein g of this world depend s
(CL 80). Henry Corbin has shown, in a penetratin g study, the im-
portance o f the orientatio n toward the Pole, the place where the
celestial revelation , "the sun at midnight, " will appear to the pil-
grim on the mystica l Path. The qutb rests in perfect tranquillity ,
grounded i n God—tha t is why all the "minor stars" revolve around
him.
One may assume a close structura l relationshi p between the con-
cept of the qutb as the highest spiritual guide of the faithful and
that of the hidden imam of Shia Islam. Not a few mystics claimed
to be the qutb of their time, and quite a number of them assume d
the role of the Mahdi, the manifestatio n of the hidden imam at
the end of time. The veneratio n shown to the imam and the qutb,
as manifeste d in the mystica l preceptor , is common to Sufism and
Shiism. Th e Shia teaches: "Who dies without knowing the imam
of his time, dies as an infidel. " And Jalaludd m Ruml, though a
relatively moderat e Sufi, said: "He who does not know the true
sheikh—i.e., th e Perfect Man and qutb of his time—is a kdfir, an
infidel" ( M 2:3325) . The world cannot exist without a pole or an
axis—it turn s around him just as a mill turns around its axis and
is otherwis e of no use (U 63).
In later Iranian theosophy , the qutb is considere d the locus of
Sarosh, th e old Zoroastria n angel of obedience , hearing, and in-
spiration wh o corresponds , in Sufi mythology , either to Gabriel
or to Israfil, the angel of resurrection . In light of this, the claim of
a modern thinker like Iqbal that he would "call a people to spiritua l
resurrection" gain s special significance ; he assumes , in a sense,
8. Muhyluddi n Ibn cArabi, Al-futuhat  al-makkiyya,  4 vols. (Cairo, 1329 h./ign) ,
chap. 198 , fasl 31.

--- Page 224 ---
A scene from Jaml's Nafahat ul-uns:
Abifl-Adyan passing  through the pyre.
British Museum,  Or. 1362
 
 Image Not Available 
 
--- Page 225 ---
2O2 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
the role of the qutb. In fact, the three angelic figures Sarosh, Israfll,
and Gabrie l occur very frequentl y in his poetry.
A very peculiar theory—o r rather an elaboratio n of the above-
mentioned ideas—wa s invente d by Ruzbiha n Baqli, who speaks
of a hierarchi c structur e of three hundred persons whose hearts are
like Adam' s heart, forty whose hearts are like Moses's heart, seven
whose heart s are fashione d after Abraham' s heart, five whose hearts
correspond t o Gabriel' s heart, three whose hearts correspon d to
that of Michael , and one, the qutb, whose heart is equal to Israfil's.
He adds to this group of saintly persons the four prophet s who
have been lifted up to Heaven alive—Idrls , Khidr, Ilyas, and Jesus—
and thus reaches the cosmic number of 360, the pleroma of saints
(CL 83).
Among th e groups in the hierarch y the Forty have gained special
prominence i n Islam. Numerou s stories are told about them, and
there are local names in the Near East connecte d with their pres-
ence, such as Kirklareli,  "the county of the Forty," in the Europea n
province o f Turkey. The word abddl, usually connecte d with the
Forty, seem s to have assumed this high spiritua l meaning only
gradually. I n a number of early Sufi texts—in Sanaa's poetry, for
example—the abddl  are usually mentione d togethe r with the ascet-
ics. Later, the word was used to designat e a saint who after his death
would be "substituted " for (badal) by another person. In Turkey ,
mainly in the Bektash i tradition , it has become a sort of sobrique t
for a certain group of mystics, like Kaygusu z Abdal, Pir Sultan
Abdal.
The Seven are mentione d in some towns as the spiritual guardian s
of a sacred place—Marrakesh , for instance , claims to be protecte d
by the Seven. Often, seven saintly persons or virgins are treated as
a single unit in veneratio n (that can be the case with the Forty as
well). A connectio n betwee n the veneratio n of the Seven and that
of the Seven Sleepers—mentione d in the Koran (Sura 18)—is
possible.9
The saint s are suppose d to know each other. Though they are
veiled fro m the eyes of the common people, they recogniz e fellow
saints withou t ever having met them, and many stories are told
about secre t meeting s of saints on certain mountain s in which,
sometimes, a n adept is allowed to partake . But on the whole it is
9. £mile Dermenghem , Le culte des saints dans I'lslam Maghrebin  (Paris, 1954), is
the best study in this field, written with a deep understandin g of mystica l Islam.

--- Page 226 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 203
held that God veils His friends from the world. "Out of jealousy ,
God puts a veil upon them and keeps them conceale d from the
public" ( N 442), says Simnam , followin g Bayezld' s idea that "the
saints are God's brides whom only the close relatives can behold"
(MC 1:43) . The hadlth qudsi, "verily my saints are under my
domes, an d only I know them," is often cited to support this idea.
The saint s are the governor s of the universe :
Every nigh t the autdd must go round the whole universe , and if there
should be any place on which their eyes have not fallen, next day some
imperfection wil l appear in that place, and they must then inform the
Qiitb, in order that he may fix his attentio n on the weak spot and that by
his blessin g the imperfectio n may be removed . (H 228)
It is through the blessing s of the saints that rain falls from heaven ;
on the places touched by their sacred feet plants spring up, and
thanks to their help the Muslim s will gain victory over the un-
believers. The y are, as Ruzbiha n put it, "the eyes which regard
God, sinc e they are the eyes through which He regards the world"
(CL 82). These ideas of saintshi p have lived among the mystics
for centurie s and were extremel y popular among the masses. They
are expande d in the theories of the great Naqshband i reforme r
Ahmad Sirhind l (d. 1624), who claimed for himself and three of
his descendant s the rank of the qayyum,  which is even superio r
to that of the qutb.
Tirmidhi distinguishe d betwee n two types of saints, the wall
sidq Allah  and the wall minnat Allah, the first one reachin g the
state of saintship through faithful adherenc e to every detail of the
sharfa an d the tarlqa, the second one by God's grace through the
act of loving (MM 16). This differentiatio n points to the differen t
spiritual an d psychologica l attitude s of the faithful in pursuin g
the Path; divine grace, however , is always required to reach the
last illuminatio n and true saintship . Tirmidh i devoted a large part
of his discussion s to the topic that gave his book its title, the khatm
al-wildya, th e "seal of saintship" ; for just as the prophet s have their
"seal," thei r closing and most perfect manifestatio n of the propheti c
spirit, in Muhammad , the saints have a "seal" as well.
The proble m of whether the saint or the prophet is endowe d
with a higher spiritua l rank has been discusse d often from the
time of Tirmidh i onward; and the traditiona l Sufi schools have
always agree d upon the superiorit y of the prophet . The end of
saintship i s only the beginnin g of prophethood . Every prophe t

--- Page 227 ---
204 /  MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
possesses th e aspect of saintshi p in himself . The mystic or saint,
however, ma y strive to attain higher and higher degrees of prox-
imity. Bu t the highes t level that the mystic or saint can reach is
spiritual ascension , which correspond s to the ascensio n that the
Prophet performe d in the body. Thus "in the last stage of saint-
ship the spirit of the saint become s similar to the body of the
Prophet" ( N 443), says Simnanl . Certainly , some mystic s of the
intoxicated type—symbolized , for example , by the love-enrap -
tured merchan t of Rumi's Mathnawl —have declare d that the mys-
tical intoxicatio n of the saint is superio r to the sobriet y of the
prophet becaus e the prophe t is not lost in the vision of God but
turns bac k to his people to teach them the will of God, being
forever unite d with the divine. The differenc e betwee n what Na-
than Soderblo m and Friedric h Heiler have denned as "mystical "
and "prophetic " religiosit y has been very clearly understoo d and
expressed b y the saints of medieva l Islam, whom Iqbal follows in
the fifth chapte r of his Reconstruction  of Religious  Thought in Islam
(iQS0)-
The role of the wall in Islamic piety does not correspon d exactly
to that of the saint in the Christia n faith. It is closely connecte d
with the mystery of initiatio n and progres s on the spiritua l path and
leads throug h a well-establishe d hierarchy , the member s of which
surpass eac h other accordin g to the degree of their love and gnosis.
The initiatio n of the adept through Khidr, the prototyp e of a saint
among th e prophets , belongs , therefore , to this discussion .
Some theorie s could lead to a deterioratio n of saintshi p in practi-
cal life if applied in the wrong way. A saying like hasandt  al-abrar
sayyfat al-muqarrabin  (L 44)— "the good deeds of the pious are
the bad deeds of those who are brough t near," i.e., the saints— could
lead, and in fact led, to the "saint" abolishin g the religiousl y pre-
scribed norms . He might conside r himself jenseits  von Gut und
Base, beyon d good and evil, claiming to be united with the divine
will in such a mysteriou s way that those dwellin g on lower levels
of the path— let alone the commo n people— are incapabl e of un-
derstanding an d appreciatin g his actions . Once more Khidr, with
his three mysterious , outwardl y destructiv e actions (Sura 18), comes
to mind. Even though the claim may be true for some saints en-
dowed wit h powerfu l personalitie s and acting in perfect sincerity ,
it could easily induce pretender s to sanctity to actions that are by no

--- Page 228 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 205
means usefu l for their fellow mystics , to say nothing of the majorit y
of the population . It is because of these darker sides of Muslim
saint worship—whic h are scarcely compatibl e with the basic teach-
ing of Islam—tha t Sufism has come into disreput e among many
Muslim modernists , who see only the negativ e aspects as they are
manifested a t the lower levels of popular piety.
One facto r that led people to believe in the spiritua l capacity of
a Sufi leader was his ability to work miracles . Numerou s stories of
saints say that "he was heard when he prayed," or "such as he said
would definitel y come true," or "when he became angry God
Almighty woul d quickly take revenge for his sake" (N 506). There
is no doubt that many Sufis indeed had extraordinar y powers to
perform act s that seemed to supersed e natural laws.
One of the main traits of Sufi hagiographica l works is that they
tell abou t the firasa, "cardiognosia " (soul-reading) , of a master.
"Beware o f the firasa [discernment ] of the faithful, " it was said,
"for he sees by God's light" (B 588). Innumerabl e stories are told
about a sheikh's insight into his disciple' s heart; he was able to tell
his secret wishes, hopes, and dislikes , to understan d signs of spiritual
pride or hypocris y the very moment the adept entered his presence .
There wer e even some who claimed to be able to discern whethe r
a person was destined for Heaven or Hell (N 439).
The saint was able to disappea r from sight, to become completel y
invisible, an d to practice buruz, exteriorization , i.e., he could be
present at different places at the same time. Accordin g to legend,
Rumi attende d seventee n parties at one time and wrote a poem at
each one! 10 The saint was capable of coming to the aid of his
disciples whereve r they were through the faculty of tayy al-makdn,
of being beyond spatial restriction , which is often attested to in
hagiography. I n cases of danger the sheikh might suddenl y appear
in the midst of a band of robbers to drive them away or assume the
shape of the ruler in order to protect a disciple who called for help,
or—as I was told several times in Turkey—th e master might appear,
in spiritualize d form, at a sick person' s bed in order to cure him
or at least relieve him temporaril y from his pain. "T o enter under
the burde n of the sick" (N 397) was a miracle often performe d by
Sufis. A very strong tawajjuh,  the concentratio n of two partners on
lo.Johann Kar l Teufel, Eine Lebensbeschreibung  des Scheichs  ^All-i Hamadanl
(Leiden, 1962) , p. 108.

--- Page 229 ---
2O6 /  MA N AND HIS PERFECTIO N
each other , is necessar y to produce such an effect; it is taken for
granted tha t the sheikh and his disciple are, so to speak, on the
same wav e length.
This unit y betwee n master and murld can manifes t itself in
vicarious suffering : when the disciple is hurt, the master's body
shows the traces. Or, as in the story of Bayezld Bistami , when his
disciples trie d to kill him, the wounds appeared on their own bodies.
Distance ha s no meanin g for the saints: "To travers e distance is
child's play : hencefort h pay visits by means of thought ; it is not
worth whil e to visit any person, and there is no virtue in bodily
presence" ( H 235), as one of Hujwiri' s masters told his disciple .
The theologian s carefull y discusse d the theories of miracles : the
saint's miracle s are called karamat,  "charismata, " wherea s the
prophet's miracle s are classifie d as mucjizdt, "wha t renders others
incapable t o do the same," and the two types must never be confused
(K 59-61) . The general term for anythin g extraordinar y is khdriq
ul-^dda, "wha t tears the custom" (of God); i.e., when God wants
to disrupt the chain of cause and result to which we are accustomed ,
since He usually acts in this or that way, a khdriqa may be per-
formed an d change the course of life. The mystics have also argued,
in length y deliberations , about whether miracle s are performe d
in the state of sobriety or in that of mystica l intoxication . They
have classifie d the miracles under differen t headings—Subk i distin-
guishes twenty-fiv e main types—an d whole collection s have been
composed t o show the various kinds of miracle s performe d by
Muslim saints. 11
Islamic hagiograph y is filled with legends , and the same miracle
is often attribute d to Sufis in distant parts of the Muslim world
(and even outside it). Motifs known from folklor e and fairy tales
are woven into this fabric—suc h as the idea that a saint can grant
a hundred-year-ol d couple three sons only to call them back when
the parent s do not behave decently . Fertility miracle s are one of
the most popular aspects of saint worship, and the hopes of barren
women ar e expresse d all over the world—no t only in Islamic lands
—by the same magical means: by binding little cradles at the gate
of the saint's abode, by taking vows, by "selling " the child to the
saint (in Turkey many boys are called Sattlmlsh,  "sold," or girls
11. Tajuddi n as-Subki , Tabaqdt  ash-shafi^iyya  al-kubrd,  12 vols. (Cairo, 1324 h./
1906), 2:5gff . The comprehensiv e study is Yusuf an-Nabaham , Jdmi^ karamat  al-
auliyd^ (Bulaq , 1329 h./igu) . See also Hans Joachim Kissling , "Die Wunde r der
Derwische," Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft  107 (1957).

--- Page 230 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 207
Sati, becaus e they were granted by a living or dead saint to whose
threshold the y were "sold" by the parents) .
Other miracle s frequentl y mentione d in Islamic sources are
connected wit h food: a buck gives milk so that unexpecte d guests
can be entertained ; food and drink are mysteriousl y provided in the
middle of the desert. Even a great mystic like Hallaj is credited
with this kind of display. For people famous for their hospitalit y
and accustome d to travelin g long distance s through uninhabite d
areas, the miraculou s productio n of food and water and, very often,
sweetmeat woul d certainl y be one of the most coveted powers of a
saint. The traveler would also appreciat e the saint about whom it
was told: "When one remember s him when a lion turns toward
you, the lion will turn away, and when one remember s him in a
place wher e bedbug s abound , the bedbug s will disappea r with
God's permission " (N 513). Many tales are concerne d with miracu-
lous rescue s from danger or escapes from death. Such a story is told
of a Sindhi saint who fell in love with a beautifu l boy and was
thrown, b y the boy's father, into the Indus, a millston e fastened
around hi s neck; he was seen, later, calmly riding on the stone on
the waves of the river.
Whosoever obey s God completely , everythin g created is bound
to obey him—tha t is an old Sufi maxim that has been illustrate d by
miracle stories . In wrath a saint can turn a flower into an alligato r
(as happene d in Mango Pir near Karachi ) or live among wild ani-
mals, who serve him, as the charmin g story of Ibrahim Raqqi relates:
In my novitiat e I set out to visit Muslim Maghribi . I found him in his
mosque, actin g as preceptor . He pronounce d al-hamd  (Praise be God)
incorrectly. I  said to myself: "My trouble has been wasted. " Next day
when I was going to the bank of the Euphrate s to perform the religiou s
ablution I  saw a lion asleep on the road. I turned back, and was faced by
another lio n which had been followin g me. Hearing my cry of despair,
Muslim cam e forth from his cell. When the lions saw him, they hum-
bled themselve s before him. He took the ear of each of them and rubbed
it, saying: "O dogs of God, have not I told you that you must not inter-
fere with my guest?" Then he said to me: "O Abu Ishaq, thou hast
busied thysel f with correctin g the exterior for the sake of God's creatures ,
hence tho u art afraid of them, but it has been my busines s to correct my
interior fo r God's sake, hence His creature s are afraid of me." (H
233-34)
The later books about Muslim saints, particularl y YafiTs Raudat
ar-riydhm, aboun d with stories—simila r to the legends of medieva l
Christian saints , and the numerou s Buddhis t tales—tha t show the

--- Page 231 ---
2O8 /  MA N AND HIS PERFECTIO N
warm, pleasan t relationshi p betwee n the man of God and the
animals. A  number of Indian and Persian miniature s show the saint
sleeping o r sitting among the beasts, the lions tamed and obedient ,
the birds at his service, the shy gazelle conversin g with him. For
the Musli m mystic, this close relationshi p with the animal world
is not at all amazing , since every creature praises God in its own
voice and he who has purified his soul understand s their praise and
can join them. Once the mystic has subdued the "dog of the lower
soul," ever y creatur e become s obedien t to him. He can, then,
sanctify a  dog by a mere glance (N 419); even the frogs may talk
to him, and the crocodile , with tears in its eyes, is willing to sur-
render its prey to him. 12 The saint would conside r it a severe set-
back on the spiritua l journey if the animals become silent and see
in him "somethin g else," so that he has to repent. 13
Not only animals , but plants and stones, too, obey the friend of
God. He may even be blessed by the appearanc e of the months in
human form , as happened , accordin g to the legend, to cAbduDl-
Qadir Gilani : every month would present itself to him as a beauti-
ful or ugly youth, accordin g to the events that were to take place
in the coming four weeks (N 512).
Many miracle s point to the capacity of the Sufi saint to spread
the true Islamic doctrines. Eve n as a baby he will not drink his
mother's mil k in the daytime during th e month of Ramadan , but
only after sunset. In the desert he is provide d with facilitie s to
perform hi s ablution s correctly . That illnesses are cured by means
of religiou s formula e is well known—th e story of the deaf girl who
was cured by the saint's whisperin g the call to prayer into her ear
is only one example from a long list of miracles in which the Sufis
used praye r and dhikr formulae for healing purposes . Even today
the recitatio n of a Fdtiha or similar prayer, together with "breathin g
upon" (damldan,  uflemek) the sick, is common in the Muslim world
(cf. N 352)—an d the faith in a religious formula pronounce d by
an alleged saint is often, in rural areas, much greater than the trust
in a Western-traine d physician .
In many miracle stories the issue at stake is that of conversion .
These storie s were frequentl y told in the classica l period of Islam,
when "materialists " or those who denied the basic tenets of Islam
la.Annemarie Schimmel , "Sufismu s und Heiligenverehrun g im spatmittelalter -
lichen Agypten, " in Festschrift  fur W. Caskel, ed. Erich Graf (Leiden , 1968), p. 282.
13. Mir CAH Shir Qani c, Tuhfat al-kiram  (Hyderabad , Sind, 1957), p. 419.

--- Page 232 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 2Og
were convince d by the Sufis. A famous example is the story of AbuDl-
Adyan in the tenth century (X 179). He argued with a Zoroastria n
that he could walk through a fire without being hurt, since fire has
the capacit y to burn only by God's permission . He indeed passed
through th e pyre and proved to the stunned Persian the truth of
the Ash carite doctrin e that there is no real causality , but that God
gives or withhold s the capacitie s of the element s to which mankin d
is accustomed : He creates these qualitie s and capacitie s anew every
moment. A  comparabl e story is related by Ibn cArabi abou t a
philosopher wh o expresse d similar views about whether fire could
burn him ; his frock was filled with fire, but it did not hurt him
(N 552).
The first version of the miracle can be explaine d by the end of
the story: at night the Sufi saint discovere d a blister on his foot.
He told his servant that this happene d the very moment he awoke
from his trance, as he was emergin g from the fire, "and if I had
come to myself in the midst of the fire, I would have been burnt
completely." H e was safeguarde d by the power of his trance. In the
same way , the Aissawiyy a dervishe s in North Africa dance with
burning coal s in their hands without feeling any pain. 14 Similar
events are often attested to in the history of religions , and particu -
larly in Sufism. The pious one become s so transporte d in his prayers
or meditatio n that he feels no pain when one of his limbs is ampu-
tated, or he is so out of himself that he is obliviou s to the bites of
scorpions o r serpents . One may think, on a lower level, of the
Rifacl dervishe s and many pretender s to Sufism who injure them-
selves by gashing themselve s with a sword or by eating glass.
In the case of AbuDl-Adyan, a s well as in the parallel story told
by Ibn cArabi, th e purpose was the conversio n of an infidel to
Islam: tha t is why these stories have been told and retold. There
are numerou s example s of this type of miracle in later times. In
Sind, a Hindu physicia n was converte d when he examine d a saint's
urine.
Even animal s played a part in the conversio n of non-Muslims .
Cats, especially , are often associate d with miracles , and some con-
vents had cats as guardians . In a religion in which, accordin g to
popular belief , even the saklna (divine presence ) is suppose d to
appear in the form of a white cat, it is not surprisin g that the strange
14. Dermenghem , Culte des saints, p. 314; see Rene Brunei , Essai sur la confrerie
religieuse de s Aissaouwa  au Maroc (Paris, 1926).

--- Page 233 ---
21O / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
beggars' orde r of the Heddaw a in Morocc o explicitl y venerate s
cats15 (wa s not the Prophet a great lover of these gentle animals?) ,
and even the novices are called quetdt, "little tomcats. " The follow-
ing story—tol d in fifteenth-centur y India about a miraculou s cat—
is a typical example in which differen t trends of miracle telling are
blended together . The story itself goes back to earlier sources (cf.
N i48). 16
It had occurre d to a disciple of Shaikh Ashraf Jahangir , Qadi Rabi caddin
by name and an inhabitan t of Awadh, that in former times there were
shaikhs whos e glance had power over animals and birds; but he did not
know whethe r such people existed at the present day. The shaikh when
he learnt of this, smiled and said "Perhaps. " Now Kamal the Jogi had a
cat which sometime s used to pass in front of the shaikh. He ordered the
cat to be brough t to him and began a discourse on a holy topic. The
shaikh's fac e graduall y assume d such expressio n that all present were
struck wit h fear. The cat also listened to the discours e and was so af-
fected tha t it fell down unconscious ; when it came to its senses again, it
began to rub the feet of the shaikh and then those of the other com-
panions. Afte r this it became a habit that when the shaikh was talking
upon divin e mysteries , the cat never left the holy gathering . When trav-
ellers wer e about to come to the khdnqdh,  it used to indicate their num-
ber by mewing ; from this the servitor s of the khdnqdh  would know for
how man y guests to lay the cloth for the meal. At the time when food
was served , the cat also was give n a portion equal to that of others who
were present , and sometime s it was sent to bring member s of the com-
pany who had been summoned . It would go to the room of the person
who had been called and by mewing insistentl y or banging at the door
would mak e the person understan d that the shaikh had summone d him.
One day a party of dervishe s had arrived at the khdnqdh.  The cat
mewed as usual but when the food was sent it appeare d that it was short
by one portion. The shaikh returned to the cat and said: "Why have you
made a mistake today?" The cat immediatel y went away and began to
sniff at each of the dervishe s of the party. When it came to the head
of the band it jumped upon his knee and made a mess. When the shaikh
saw what had happene d he said: "The poor cat has done nothing wrong:
this man is a stranger. " The head of the band immediatel y cast himself
at the feet of the shaikh and said "I am a dahriyya [materialist] . For
twelve year s I have travelle d through the world wearing the garment s of
Islam. It was my intentio n that if it should so befall that some Sufi rec-
ognized me , I would accept Islam. Up to now none has known my
secret: bu t that cat has revealed it. Today I accept Islam . . . ."
The cat remaine d alive until after the death of the shaikh.  One day
the successo r of the shaikh had put a pot of milk upon the fire in order
15. Rene Brunei, Le monachisme  errant dans I'lslam, Sidt Heddi et les Heddawa
(Paris, 1955) , one of the most lovable books on a little known aspect of Sufism.
16. Quote d from Simon Digby, "Encounter s with Jogis in Indian Sufi Hagiography, "
mimeographed, Schoo l of Orienta l and African Studies (London , January 1970). For
the story see Fritz Meier, ed., Die "fawd^ih  al-gamdl  wa fawdtih al-galal"  des Nagmud-
dln al-Kubrd  (Wiesbaden , 1957), p. 28.

--- Page 234 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 211
to cook milk rice and it chanced that a snake fell into the pot. The cat
saw this and circled around the pot: he would not budge from the place
and he mewed several times, but the cook did not understan d and drove
him out of the kitchen. When the cat saw that there was no way of
making th e cook understand , he leapt into the boiling liquid and sur-
rendered hi s life. The rice had of course to be thrown away, and with it
a black snake was discovered . The Sufi remarked that the cat had sacri-
ficed his own life for the sake of the dervishes , and a tomb should be
built for him.
In connectio n with the manifestatio n of spiritual power, contests
(mundqara) wer e held to prove which saint was more powerfu l
and could work more exciting miracles . These contests—whic h go
back at least to Shibli—ar e usually ascribed to the popula r saints,
who coul d easily turn their enemies into stones or wither trees
with thei r curses. One of the most charmin g stories in this other-
wise rathe r unpleasan t and, basically , un-Sufi field of spiritua l
contests ha s been told by Emile Dermenghe m about a North Afri-
can saint who came riding on a lion to visit another saint. He was
told to put his lion in the stable where the host's cow was tethered .
Reluctantly, h e entered the house and saw his host surrounde d by
beautiful dancin g girls, which made him doubt his mystica l quali-
ties. But the next mornin g he found that his lion had been de-
voured b y the cow. 17
There was , however , one problem behind all the miracle stories
that so delighte d the crowds . To what extent was it legitimat e
for a mystic to perform miracle s at all?
It is said that Junayd criticize d Nuri when the latter swore that
he would drown himself in the Tigris unless he could catch a fish
of a certain weight (which he succeede d in catching) . Apprehensiv e
of this kind of miracle, Junayd said that he would have preferre d a
viper to come out of the river and punish the impuden t mystic
(L 32?)-
Junayd's vie w is typical of the sober, high-rankin g mystic s
throughout history ; they regard interest in miracle s as one of the
three "veils " that can cover the hearts of the elect (the two others
being too much attentio n to works of obedienc e and hope for
heavenly reward). 18
A beautifu l story is attribute d to Abu Sacld ibn Abfl-Khayr .
Someone tol d him about a mystic who walked on water, and he
17. Dermenghem , Culte des saints, p. 12.
18. A. Tahir al-Khanqahi , Guzida dar akhldq u tasawwuf,  ed. Iraj Afshar (Tehran ,
1347 sh./ig68) , p. 19.

--- Page 235 ---
212 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
said: "Frog s and waterfow l do that as well!" When the person said,
"and so-and-s o flies in the air!" he replied: "So do birds and insects!"
And whe n the narrato r told him that somebod y went from one
town to the other in one minute, he answered : "Satan goes in one
moment fro m the East to the West!" (NS 67). On another occasion
he reproache d somebod y who asked what kind of miracles a certain
Sufi had to his credit by drawing his attentio n to the life story of
the saint in question : Is it not the greatest miracle that a butcher,
who was also a butcher's son, should be attracted to the mystical Path,
talk to Khidr, and be visited by innumerabl e people who want to
obtain his blessing s (N 288)?
The great masters considere d miracle s snares o n the way toward
God. The adept who has reached a certain stage on the Path will
certainly gai n the power of working some extraordinar y feats, and
these will probably keep him from further progress on the Path.
It is so much easier to perform miracle s and attract the interest
of the masses than to pursue the hard path of spiritua l training
and constan t struggle with the subtlest ruses of the lower self. This
aversion o f the spirituall y advance d mystics for the kind of miracle-
mongering tha t constitute d part of the activitie s of the "shopkeepe r
sheikhs" an d pseudo-mystic s has found its crudest expressio n in an
alleged hadlth:  "Miracle s are the menstruatio n of men" (IK 449).
This saying , which seems to belong to the Indian, or at least eastern,
part of the Muslim world, indicate s that miracles come between
man and God. Just as the husband avoids intercours e with his wife
during th e days of her impurity , so God denies mystical union to
those who perform miracles . A different explanatio n of this oft-
quoted sayin g may be found in another sentence—als o current
among th e Indian Muslim s since the thirteent h century—tha t jux-
taposes th e tdlib ad-dunyd,  "who seeks the world," the tdlib al-
dkhira, "wh o seeks the otherworld, " and the tdlib al-mauld,  "who
seeks the Lord." Only the last one is masculine,  the second being
equal to a eunuch indulgin g in passive pederasty (a classificatio n that
cAttar ascribe d to Shibli); and he who seeks the world is as low as a
female and , we may conclude , therefor e also afflicted with female
impurities. Th e performanc e of miracles is a sign that a person's in-
tention is still directed toward worldy approval , not exclusivel y
toward God. 19
19. Syed Muhammad Naguib al-Attas , The Mysticism  of Hamza al-Fansuri  (Kuala
Lumpur, 1970) , p. 414; "lust" and even "poetry" hav e been called the "menstruation

--- Page 236 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 2ig
There is no doubt that many of the miracle s wrough t by Sufi
saints wer e true and real. These mystics had the power to bring
down into the world of phenomen a events that were still in the
cdlam al-mithdl  and could, by virtue of their spiritua l purity, help
their disciple s on the difficult path. But the danger of using certain
extraordinary gift s for impure, or at least for less worthy, spiritual
purposes wa s always present. And the saint was right who said:
"It is better to restore one dead heart to eternal life than to restore
to life a thousand dead bodies." 20
THE VENERATION OF THE PROPHET
In his Mathnawl  Rumi tells how the infant Muhamma d
got lost and his nurse Halima , dissolved in tears, was consoled with
the words :
Do not grieve: he will not become lost to thee;
nay, but the whole world will become lost in him.
(M 4:975)
This was certainly a perfect expressio n of the feelings of every Mus-
lim in the thirteent h century . A few centurie s later, the Turkish
Sufi poet Eshrefoghl u happily addresse d the Prophet :
In Muhammad' s gatherin g I put on the trousers of faith
and came, strutting like a peacock. 21
From earlies t times, Muhammad , the messenge r of God, had been
the ideal for the faithful Muslim . His behavior , his acts, and his
words serve d as models for the pious, who tried to imitate him as
closely as possible even in the smalles t details of outward life—be
it the form of dress, the style of the beard, the performanc e of the
tiniest particular s of ablution , and even his preferenc e for certain
kinds of food.
A new dimensio n was added by the introductio n of much legen-
dary lore into the Prophet' s biography . He himself had rejected
legends an d forbade any personalit y cult, claiming to have only one
of men." The classificatio n of tdlib al-maula,  tdlib al-dkhira,  and talib ad-dunyd  seems
to have been invente d by Jamaluddi n Hanswi , the Chishtl saint of the late thirteent h
century; se e Zubaid Ahmad , The Contribution  of Indo-Pakistan  to Arabic Literature,
2d ed., (Lahore , 1968), p. 82. It was used by almost every Indo-Musli m mystic .
20. H. T. Sorley, Shah Abdul Latif of Bhit: His Poetry, Life, and Times (1940; re-
print ed., Oxford, 1966), p. 248.
21. Willia m Hickman , "Eshrefoghl u Rumi: Reconstitutio n of his dlwdn"  (Ph.D.
diss., Harvar d University , 1972). no. M 7.

--- Page 237 ---
214 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
miracle to his credit, that of having transmitte d the words of the
Koran to his people. Yet he was surrounde d by miracles : the gazelle
spoke to him, the palm-tre e trunk sighed when he no longer leaned
against it while preaching , the poisone d sheep warned him not to
eat it, the handkerchie f with which he had wiped his mouth and
hands woul d not burn in a furnace. All the noble qualitie s of his
body and his soul were describe d in terms of marked admiration .
Since Musli m traditio n forbids figural representation , one finds,
instead, account s of Muhammad' s lofty qualitie s (hilya) written in
exquisite calligraph y hanging on the walls of the houses; such
hilyas are still sold in the courtyard s of some Turkish mosques .
The personalit y of the Prophet became the medium of religiou s
experience, although , phenomenologicall y speaking , the center of
Islam is the Koran as direct divine revelation , not the messenge r
who brough t it. But the Muslim s felt that the figure of the Prophet
was necessar y for the maintenanc e of the Muslim faith in its "legal"
aspect (as indicated in the second phrase of the professio n of faith).
The Prophet , as Rumi says (M 3:801), is a divine test for man; in
contrast t o Iblisian tauhid,  which will bow only before God, the
Prophet i s put in between to destroy this temptation , which may
lead, ultimately , toward pantheis m and confusio n of all religiou s
creeds. Muhamma d constitute s a limit in the definitio n of Islam and
sets it off from other forms of faith. Mystics who used the first half
of the professio n of faith exclusively , without acknowledgin g the
special ran k of Muhammad , were prone to fall into a sweeping
pantheistic interpretatio n of Islam.
Some of the early mystics might have claimed that their love of
God did not leave any room for a specialize d love of the Prophet .
"One nigh t I saw the Prophet in my dream. He said: 'Do you love
me?' I said: 'Forgive me, but the love of God has kept me busy
from lovin g thee.' He said 'Whosoeve r loves God, loves me' " (T
2:41). Other s might have been reluctan t to mentio n his name
together wit h God's name in the call to prayer (Q 17). But the
beginning o f a genuine Muhamma d mysticis m dates back to the
early eight h century . Muqatil idealized the person of Muhamma d
in his work; and it was this mystic who interprete d the second
sentence o f the dyat an-nur, the "Light verse" of the Koran (Sura
24:35), as pertainin g to Muhammad , whose light shines through
the other prophets (W 93-94) . Kharraz elaborated upo n these ideas,

--- Page 238 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 215
and Halla j devotes much of his Kitdb at-tawdsm  to the praise of
the Prophet : he is the first created being, his light precede s every-
thing and is part of God's light. As cAttar says , in the same vein,
The origi n of the soul is the absolute light, nothing
else,
That mean s it was the light of Muhammad , nothing else.
(U 358)
The Prophe t is, in Hallaj's hymn, both the cause and goal of cre-
ation. To give this idea more authority , it was couched in a hadith
qudsl: lauldka  md khalaqtu :>l-afldka—"it tho u hadst not been (but
for thee), I would not have created the heavens. " The world was
created fo r the primordia l love that manifeste d itself in the Prophe t
Muhammad. Th e Prophe t himself was credited with words that
highlight hi s extraordinar y position : "The first thing God created
was my spirit." "I was a prophet when Adam was still between clay
and water. "
The idea of the "Muhammada n light" seems to have been fully
developed abou t 900—Sah l at-Tustar l speaks of the three lights of
God, the first one being Muhammad , his special friend: "When He
wanted t o create Muhamma d He showed a light from His light
which illuminate d the whole kingdom." 22 The most famous prayer
ascribed t o Muhamma d is a prayer for light, which has been trea-
sured by the mystics of Islam. Abu Talib al-Makk i quotes it; Ghaz-
zall taugh t it; and the eighteenth-centur y Indian mystic Mir Dard
wrote it down as his last orison before his death:
O God, give me light in my heart and light in my tongue and light in
my hearin g and light in my sight and light in my feeling and light in
all my body and light before me and light behind me. Give me, I pray
Thee, ligh t on my right hand and light on my left hand and light above
me and light beneath me. O Lord, increase light within me and give me
light and illuminat e me!
Makki continue s his quotation : "These are the lights which the
Prophet aske d for: verily to possess such light means to be con-
templated b y the Light of Lights." 23 Sana 0! takes up the traditio n
that hellfir e is afraid of the true believer' s light, connectin g it with
the Muhammada n light:
22. CAH ibn Ahmad DaylamI , Kitdb  catf al-alif  al-ma^luf  ila^l-lam  al-ma^tuf,  ed.
Jean-Claude Vade t (Cairo, 1962), p. 33, § 123.
23. Smith , Readings,  no. 47.

--- Page 239 ---
2l6 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
When you r heart has become filled with the Light of
Ahmad,
then know with certitud e that you are safe from the Fire.
(S 202)
Even withou t any knowledg e of these high speculation s on the
Prophetic light , which were to develop into complicate d mystica l
systems, th e faithfu l simply loved the Prophet . For love of the
Prophet lead s to love of God. This idea was expressed , in later
Sufism, b y the theory of the fand ffr-rasul.  The mystic no longer
goes straigh t on his Path toward God: first he has to experienc e
annihilation i n the spiritua l guide, who function s as the representa -
tive of the Prophet , then the fand ffr-rasul,  "annihilatio n in the
Prophet," befor e he can hope to reach, if he ever does, fand ft Allah.
In a masterfu l study Tor Andrae has shown how this veneratio n
of the Prophe t grew during the first six centurie s of Islamic reli-
gious history , until the Muhamma d mysticis m was fully systematize d
by Ibn cArabi and his followers. 24
As early as the late elevent h century , and generall y from the
twelfth centur y on, the veneratio n of the Prophet assume d a visible
form in the celebratio n of the maulid,  his birthday , on 12 Rabi c ul-
aivwal, th e third month of the Muslim lunar year. This day is still
celebrated i n the Muslim world. 25 The numbe r of poems written
for this festive occasio n in all Islamic language s is beyond reckon-
ing. From the eastern end of the Muslim world to the west the
maulid is a wonderfu l occasion for the pious to show their warm
love of the Prophe t in songs, poems, and prayers . Nowher e has the
simple trus t in the grace of the Prophe t and his intercessio n at
Doomsday bee n expresse d more beautifull y than in Turkey , where
Suleyman Qeleb i of Bursa (d. 1419) told the story of Muhammad' s
birth in his Mevlud-i  serif, a mathnawl  in touchingl y unsophisti -
cated Turkish  verse of the simples t possible meter, to which is added
a sweet melody. 26 This poem is still recited on special occasion s in
many Turkis h families : at the anniversaries , or at the fortieth day,
of a bereavemen t or in fulfilmen t of a vow. Parallels to the central
24. Tor Andrae , Die person Muhammads  in lehre und glauben  seiner gemeinde
(Stockholm, 1918) . See now: Annemari e Schimmel , And Mohammed  Is His Messenger
(Chapel Hill , 1985).
25. Ibn Kathir, Maulid rasul Allah, ed. Salahuddi n al-Munajji d (Beirut , 1961).
26. F. Lyman McCallum , trans., The Mevlidi  Sherif by Suleyman  Chelebi (Lon-
don, 1943) . See Irmgard Engelke , Sulejman  Tschelebis  Lobgedicht  auf die Geburt des
Propheten (Halle , 1926).

--- Page 240 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 217
part of SiiJeyma n (Jelebi's Mevlud,  the great Merhaba,  "Welcome, "
chapter, hav e been found as far away as India, where Abu CA1I
Qalandar, i n the fourteent h century, greeted the new-bor n Prophet :
Welcome, o  Nightingal e of the Ancient Garden!
Speak to us about the lovely Rose!
Welcome, o  Hoepoe of happy augury,
Welcome, yo u sugar-talkin g Parrot.. . !
(AP 109)
In the hearts of the masses, Muhamma d is primaril y the intercesso r
at Doomsday ; as the only prophet , he will interced e for his com-
munity, a s the Koran has promised . It is this trust in his help at the
terrible Da y of Judgmen t that has largely colored the popula r
veneration o f Muhammad . He was sent as "mercy for the worlds, "
rahmatan lil cdlamin (Sur a 21:107) . As such, he may be compared ,
as Shah cAbdu3l-LatIf o f Sind has done, to the cloud that sends down
the life-givin g rain to the thirsty fields, quickenin g what seemed
to be dead. The rain is, in fact, called rahmat,  "mercy," by the
villagers i n Turkey and Iran. And the image of the "jewel-carryin g
cloud," whic h stretche s from Istanbu l to Delhi, shedding its gems
over the hearts of the Muslims , is not uncommo n among the Indian
poets whe n they sing of the Prophet (cf. Sura 7-'55). 27
It was only natural that the faithful saw their beloved Prophe t
in the light of the Koranic revelatio n and that those expression s
from the Koran that point to his high rank were repeated over
and over again in mystical piety and in poetry. Thus, the beginnin g
words of Sura 54—"an d the moon was split"—ar e taken to allude
to Muhammad' s supernatura l powers: he was able to split the
moon. The y are also meant for the faithful who has annihilate d
himself in him and works through the Muhammada n light; as
Rumi says , "I split the moon with the light of Mustafa " (D 2967).
Mustafa, "th e Elect," is one of the names by which the Prophe t is
commonly known .
The proble m of the baraka,  the blessing power of the Prophet' s
name, has often been discussed, 28 and the Turkish usage of calling
boys by his name, but pronouncin g the consonan t skeleton with
27. Annemari e Schimmel , "Der Regen als Symbol in der Religionsgeschichte, " in
Religion un d Religionen:  Festschrift  Gustav  Mensching  (Bonn, 1966).
28. Augus t Fischer , "Vergottlichun g und Tabuisierun g der Namen Muhammads, " in
Beitrdge zu r Arabistik,  Semitistik  und Islamkunde,  ed. Helmut h Scheel and Richar d
Hartmann (Leipzig , 1944).

--- Page 241 ---
2l8 /  MA N AND HIS PERFECTIO N
a differen t vocalization—namely , Mehmed  instead of Muhammad-
is part of the respect due to the blessed name of the Prophet . Many
poets sang : "Thy name is beautiful , you are beautiful , Muham -
mad!" Or they have alluded to the high names bestowe d upon him
by Allah.
I addresse d the wind: "Why do you serve Solomon? "
He said: "Becaus e Ahmad' s [i.e., Muhammad's ] name
was engrave d on his seal."
(SD 167)
Thus Sana 3! explain s the miraculou s power of a previous prophet .
Expressions fro m the Koranic suras are used to describe the Proph-
et's marvelou s beauty and majesty :
"By the Sun" is a story of Muhammad' s face,
"By the Night" is a metaphor for Muhammad' s hair.29
Thus, the oath formula e that form the beginnin g lines of Sura
91 and 92 were fitting allusion s to Muhammad' s eternal loveliness ,
his sunlik e radiant face, and his black hair; and the most commonl y
used Korani c allusion is "by the mornin g light" (Sura 93), which
is usually applied to his face. An exquisit e example of this kind of
interpretation i s Sanaa's hymn on Muhammad , which is a poetical
commentary o n Sura 93 (SD 34).
The fact that Muhamma d is called umml in the Koran (Sura
7:157), a word usually translate d as "illiterate, " was considere d to
have a special mystical implication . Only a man whose heart was
not spoile d by outward intellectua l achievemen t and learning , but
was as pure a vessel as Mary's virgin body, could be a worthy re-
ceptacle fo r the divine word. When later mystics boasted of their
alleged or real illiteracy , which permitte d them to read only the
letter alif,  the symbol of divine unity and uniqueness , they had
the Prophet' s example always before their eyes—th e model of pure
love and surrender , as opposed to cold reasoning .
The main object of mystical meditation , however , was Muham-
mad's nigh t journey , the mfrdj, his ascent through the spheres—
a topic only touched upon in the introductor y verse of Sura 17,
but lavishl y elaborate d upon in later legends. The connectio n of
the mfraj with daily prayer—whic h was experience d by Muham -
mad as a repetition of the joy of ascensio n (H 302)—mad e such an
29. Cited in Muhamma d Nasir cAndalib, Ndla-yi  ^Andallb,  2 vols. (Bhopal , 1309
h./iSgi-ga), 2:818 .

--- Page 242 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 21Q
ascension int o the divine presenc e possible for every sincere Mus-
lim. The mystics applied the ascensio n terminolog y to their own
experiences i n the rapture of ecstasy. Bayezid Bistami was the first
to use this imagery in describin g his mystica l flight through the
heavens, an d he was followed by many others. 30 Enrico Cerulli
has shown that the literary genre of the Libro della scala, the "Book
of micraj," was so well known in the medieva l Mediterranea n world
that possibl e influence s on Dante's Divina Commedia  cannot be
excluded.31 I n the twentiet h century , Muhamma d Iqbal has chosen
the type of the heavenl y journey in the compan y of the spiritua l
preceptor (i n his case the spirit of Ruml) for his most intriguin g
literary work , the Jdwldndme  (igga). 32
It is the experienc e of love that manifest s itself in the ascensio n
of God's speciall y elected friend Muhamma d Mustafa . Ruml ex-
pressed it this way:
Love is ascensio n toward the roof of the Prince of
Beauty,
Read the story of the ascensio n from the cheek of the
beloved.
(D 133)
According t o the tradition , not even Gabriel could accompan y the
Prophet beyon d the ultimat e lotus tree, as-sidrat  al-muntahd.  "If
I would go one step further, my wings would get burned, " is the
archangel's sigh , as the poets and mystics interprete d it. For Ruml,
this answe r describe s the weaknes s of discursiv e reason when it
draws neare r to the mystery of divine love:
Reason speaks , like Gabriel: O Ahmad,
If I advance one step, He will burn me.
(M 1:1066 )
30. Many articles have been devote d to the Prophet' s ascension , e.g., Bernhar d
Schrieke, "Di e Himmelsreis e Muhammads, " Der Islam 6 (1916); Joseph Horovitz ,
"Muhammads Himmelfahrt, " Der Islam 9 (1919); Richard Hartmann , "Die Himmels -
reise Muhammad s und ihre Bedeutun g in der Religio n des Islam," in Vortrdge  der
Bibliothek Warburg  (Hamburg , 1928-29) ; Geo Widengren , Muhammad,  the Apostle
of God, and His Ascension  (Uppsala , 1955).
31. Enrico Cerulli , // "Libro della Scala" e la questione  delle fonti arabo-spagnole
della "Divina  Commedia"  (Vatican City, 1949).
32. Jawidndme  (Lahore , 1932); English translations , Shaikh Mahmu d Ahma d
(Lahore, 1961 ) and A. J. Arberry (London , 1966); German verse translation , Annemari e
Schimmel (1957) ; Italian translation , Alessandr o Bausan i (1955); French translation ,
Eva Meyerovitc h (1962); Turkish translation , Annemari e Schimme l (1958). Annemari e
Schimmel, Gabriel's  Wing: A Study into the Religious  Ideas of Sir Muhammad  Iqbal
(Leiden, 1963) , contains a detailed bibliograph y on prophetolog y and ascension .

--- Page 243 ---
22O / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
It was at this moment that the Prophet was left alone in the loving
encounter wit h God that he describe s with the words, "I have a
time with God in which no created being has access, not even
Gabriel wh o is pure spirit." For Gabriel is still a veil between
the lover and the beloved .
The Prophet' s expressio n "I have a time with God" (It maca
Allah waqt]  is often used by the Sufis to point to their experienc e of
waqt, "time, " the momen t at which they break through created
time and reach the Eternal Now in God, when everythin g created
(including th e archangel ) remains outside and is, in their experi-
ence, annihilated . Iqbal, in his modern interpretatio n of mystical
symbols, understand s this tradition as a reference to the momen t
at which "the infidel's girdle," namely, "serial" time, is torn and
the mystic establishe s direct contact with God in a person-to-perso n
encounter.
This emphasi s on the person-to-perso n encounte r in the mystical
interpretation o f the infra] seems particularl y revealing . The Proph-
et, althoug h created as the most perfect being, still remains a
creature an d is not united with God. The opening words of Sura
17—"praised b e He who traveled with His servant at night"— indi-
cate that even in the moment of rapture the Prophet is still called
^abduhu, "Hi s servant. " That implies that "servant " is the highest
possible nam e for a human being, who, however , is able to speak
to God without being extinguished .
The poet s and artists of the Persian - and Turkish-speakin g
lands hav e lovingly embellishe d the story of the mi^rdj. Almost
every grea t Persian epic contains a special chapter, after the general
praise of the Prophet , in which the poet indulges in imaginativ e de-
scription o f the heavenl y journey , performe d on the handsom e
steed Burdq,  with its peacock tail and human face. In ever new
images th e poets describe how Muhamma d passes through the
spheres o f sun and moon and along the Milky Way, talking with
the prophets , surrounde d by colorful angels, until he reaches the
divine presence , when Gabriel remains behind, "lonely, like a
nightingale wh o is separate d from the rose." 33 And miniature s
from the fourteent h and fifteenth centurie s show the Prophet in a
wonderful aur a of overwhelmin g splendor. 34
33. Ghanizade , "Mi crajiyye," i n Eski §airlerimiz,  ed. Mehme t Fuat Kopruli i (Is-
tanbul, 1931) , p. 356.
34. Richar d Ettinghausen , "Persia n Ascensio n Miniature s of the i4th Century, "
Publicazione delle  Academia  del Lincei, 1957.

--- Page 244 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 221
Another Korani c passage upon which the mystics meditate d is
Sura 53, an-Najm,  "The Star," which describe s Muhammad' s vi-
sion. The fact that "his sight did not rove" is, for the mystic, the
symbol of Muhammad' s absolute concentratio n upon God. In his
motionless and  steadfast contemplation , the Prophet is superior to
Moses, wh o had asked for vision and could not even look at the
divine manifestatio n through the burning bush without fainting .
As Jamali Kanboh put it in fifteenth-centur y India:
Moses wen t out of his mind by a single revelatio n of
the Attributes —
Thou sees t the essence of the Essence and still smilest.
(AP 158)
The expressio n qdba qausayn,  "two bows' length," found in the
same Sura , designate s for the mystics the highest degree of proxim-
ity the heart can reach.
The differen t Koranic dicta about Muhamma d as the Seal of
Prophets, afte r whom no prophet will ever appear on earth, have
shaped th e Muslim faith in general and have provide d the Sufis
with almos t infinite possibilitie s for meditatin g on the mysterie s
hidden behin d the person of the Prophet .
Since a close imitatio n of the Prophet' s actions was binding for
every faithfu l Muslim , one of the occupation s that pious Sufis
would undertak e was the collectio n of Propheti c traditions , and
more tha n one well-know n Sufi's name is noted in the chain of
transmitters o f hadlth. Among them is Ibn Khafif, the saint of
Shiraz, wh o collecte d tradition s from more than thirty masters -
yet the Hanbalit e theologia n Ibn al-Jauzi (d. 1200) calls him "not
trustworthy."35 An d he may be right in his criticism—fo r it cannot
be denied that many of the tradition s that are favorite s with the
later Sufis have no basis in the "canonical " collection s of hadlth
completed i n the last third of the ninth century . As time passed,
mystical thinker s and poets made use of certain tradition s that
cannot be verified before the tenth or even the eleventh century .
At the same time, the number of the so-called hadlth qudsl—tradi-
tions tha t contain some extra-Korani c divine revelations—gre w
along wit h the Sufi influenc e on Muslim piety.
As worthy of reward as the occupatio n with hadlth might have
been in itself, it was objected to by many Sufis, who believed more
35. Ibn al-Jauzi , Talbls Iblis (Cairo, 1340 h./igsi-ss) , p. 358.

--- Page 245 ---
222 / MAN AND HI S PERFECTION
in direct experienc e than in copying words. As Kharaqam , himself
illiterate, says : "The heir of the Prophe t is he who follows the
Prophet wit h his actions, not he who blacken s the face of paper"
(N 299)—t o "blacke n the face" of somethin g means to disgrace it,
and here the term is cleverly adapted to the art of writing seemingly
useless texts .
In the course of time, Muhamma d was surrounde d by many
charming stories , which reached the common people through the
qisas al-anbiya >, "The Stories of the Prophets, " and through Sufi
interpretation o f the Koran and hadith and shaped their ideas
about Muhammad . The developmen t of Persian mystica l poetry,
with its language so permeate d by allusion s to Koranic and hadith
material, contribute d to this process of popularization . The Proph-
et's hijra from Mecca to Medina became the prototyp e of the
mystical Path , the journey from home and back (and thus a micro-
cosmic pictur e of the way of the soul from God and back to God).
Only such a journey can bring man to perfection . Muhammad' s
poverty becam e the model of mystical poverty; his way of educatin g
his shay tan, the base faculties , prefigure d the Sufi's constant struggle
with his nafs. Romanti c trends are not lacking in this new picture
of Muhamma d painted by his community . There is the lovely story
produced b y later Persian Sufis to explain their love of roses:
"When th e Prophet saw a rose, he kissed it and pressed it to his
eyes and he said: 'The red rose is part of God's glory' " (BA 77).
Or, in a different tradition , which is widely accepted : the rose was
created fro m the Prophet' s perspiratio n and is therefor e the most
beautiful an d preciou s flower in the world (cf. U 28; D 1348). The
Prophet's lov e for roses may have induced the poets to call him
"the nightingal e of the Eternal Garden, " for he disclose s to the
faithful som e of the mysterie s of God, the Everlastin g Rose. And
when the mystics were so overwhelme d by God's greatness , beauty,
and majest y that they no longer knew how to articulat e their long-
ing and their admiration , they remembere d Muhammad' s simple
words of thanks— Id uhsl thanffan ^alaika,  "I cannot reckon the
praise $ue  to Thee"—thu s acknowledgin g that God's bounty ex-
ceeds the thanks that man can render.
A distinguishe d role was given to Muhammad' s family as well—
the Sufi khirqa was sometime s interprete d as inspired by the mantle
in which the Prophe t had wrappe d his family members , and the
Sufis thus became "member s of his family." The veneratio n of the

--- Page 246 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 223
Prophet's family , common in Shia Islam, can be found in Sufi
circles as well, and the reverenc e shown to the sayyids, his descen-
dants, is part of this veneration. 36
The stron g faith in Muhammad , about whom the Koran says,
"who obey s the Messenger , obeys God" (Sura 4:82), might lead
to the thought that Muhamma d had said: "Who has seen me, has
seen Allah." 37 Words like that must be understoo d in connectio n
with the speculation s about Muhammad' s cosmic function , his
unique plac e among men and among the prophets . Even an ortho-
dox mysti c like Ghazzali , in his Mishkdt  al-anwdr,  spoke of the
mutdc, the "one who is obeyed," whom he defines as Allah's khalifa
or vicegerent , the supreme controlle r of the whole universe . Indeed,
according t o the Koran, Muhamma d was he who has to be obeyed,
and thus one may assume that the great mystic had in mind the
equation mutd c=^Muhammad, thoug h this cannot be absolutel y
proved. Th e relation betwee n Allah and the mutd c is likened to
the relatio n of the impalpabl e essence of light to the sun, or of the
elemental fir e to a glowing coal, an equatio n that would lead the
mystic, onc e more, to the concept of the Muhammada n light as
"light from God's light."
The questio n has been posed whethe r or not this mutd c is a
personification o f the amr, the divine command , or, as W. H.
Temple Gairdne r holds, of the ruh, the spirit—i n fact, in Jill's (d.
after 1408 ) theosoph y the amr (which correspond s roughly to the
logos of Greek philosophy ) is equated with the haqlqa muham-
madiyya, th e reality of Muhamma d or the archetypa l Muhammad .
That woul d lead one to see the mutd^ as the cosmic Muhamma d
who become s the workin g principl e in the world. The absolut e
transcendence o f God has remove d Him, so to speak, into the
situation o f a deus otiosus, one and absolutel y aloof from the
movement o f the world. As Reynold A. Nicholso n puts it:
God indee d remains the creator of the world, but He is no longer in any
direct sens e its ruler. He is absolutel y transcendent , and since the moving
of the heavenl y spheres would be incompatibl e with His unity, that
function i s assigned to One by whose comman d the spheres are moved,
36. See Marijan Mole, "Les Kubrawiyy a entre Sunnism e et Shiisme, " Revue des
etudes islamiques,  1961, p. 73. A typical example is Mir Dard, who derived his whole
approach t o his own family and to mystica l experienc e from the fact that he was a
sayyid fro m both sides, hence closest to the Prophet .
37. Badl cuz-Zaman Furuzanfar , Ahudlth-i  mathnawi  (Tehran , 1334 sh.71955) , no.
62; see Farlduddi n cAttar, Diivdn-i  qasa-'id wa ghazaliydt,  ed. Sacid Nafisi (Tehran , 1339
sh./1960), p . 50.

--- Page 247 ---
224 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTION
i.e., to the mutcf. The mutd c is not identica l with God: he must there-
fore be a created being . . . [He] represent s the archetypa l Spirit of Mu-
hammad, th e Heavenl y Man created in the image of God and regarded
as a Cosmic Power on whom depend s the order and preservatio n of the
Universe.38
This lead s to the role of Muhamma d as fully worked out by Ibn
cArabi. Ther e Muhamma d assumes the place of the Perfect Man.
God create d a microcosmi c being, the Perfect Man, insan kdmil,
through who m His consciousnes s is manifeste d to Himself . The
Perfect Ma n is the spirit in which all things have their origin; the
created spiri t of Muhamma d is, thus, a mode of the uncreate d
divine spirit , and he is the medium throug h which God become s
conscious o f Himself in creation . It would be correct to compar e
the nur muhammadi,  the Muhammada n Light, or the haqlqa mu-
hammadiyya t o the active intellect of Hellenisti c philosophy.  One
can say in this context that the whole world is created from the light
of Muhammad : Israfll, the angel of Doomsday , is created from
his heart; Gabriel become s equivalen t to the First Intelligence ;
Muhammad's intelligenc e correspond s to the heavenl y Pen; and
his soul to the Well-preserve d Tablet.
To point out this unique rank of Muhammad—quit e a while
before Ib n cArabi's systematizin g attempts and Jill's speculation s
about Muhamma d as the insan kamil—the  Sufis invented the hadlth
qudsi, and Ahmad bila mini, "I am Ahmad (= Muhammad ) with-
out the letter m," i.e., Ahad, "One." Only the letter m—the letter of
creatureliness an d trial, of discontinuit y and limitation , of death
(being the initial letter of maut, "death"), an d of the illusory aspect
of: everythin g besides God—separate s the Prophet—announce d as
Ahmad, th e Paraclet e (Sura 61:6)—fro m God, the One, the Eternal
and Everlasting . The numerica l value of the letter m is forty, and
it thus correspond s to the forty stages through which man, having
descended int o the depths of created beings, can ascend again to
God, eventuall y throwin g off the "shawl of humanity, " as a Punjabi
poet has called the letter m.
Almost ever y poet in the eastern Islamic world, beginnin g with
c Attar, has used this hadlth qudsl—the  Uzbeg ruler Shaiban i in the
sixteenth century , the Chishti saint Gisudara z in India (d. 1422),
Jalaluddm Rum i in thirteenth-centur y Konya, Ghalib in nine-
teenth-century Delhi , and many folk poets of Turkey and north-
38. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Idea of Personality  in Sufism (Cambridge , 1923),
p. 44.

--- Page 248 ---
MAN AN D HIS PERFECTIO N / 225
western India . "The two worlds are created from the two m's of his
name" (U 20), says cAttar, and later mystics invented lengthy , but
not alway s very persuasive , explanation s of the meanin g of Mu-
hammad's name . Ahmad Sirhind i even built his whole system for
the renovatio n of Islam after the first milleniu m upon speculation s
on the two ra's of Muhamma d (see chapter 8).
The Sufis found that Adam, created by God "in His image" and
thus the perfect copy of the divine creator, is nothing but Muham -
mad: "surel y the head of Adam is a m f, and his hand is a h e and
his middl e part is a m .; the remainin g part is a d •>. Thus it was
that the name Muhamma d .u^. was written in the old script." 39 The
form of Adam, and therefor e of every human being, bears in itself
the name of Muhammad . The same thirteenth-centur y Egyptia n
mystic wh o first proposed this idea had another , much more com-
plicated syste m to prove that in the very letter value of the word
Muhammad ar e containe d the 313 messenger s who possess the
qualifications o f prophecy , plus one messenge r of the station of
sainthood. Othe r mystics would claim that the Prophe t is the
manifestation o f the divine name ar-Rahman,  "the merciful, " which
is usually considere d the most importan t and essentia l name after
the name Allah.
One of the finest expression s of the mysticall y deepene d love of
Muhammad wit h all its implication s is the famous Burda, the ode
written b y the Egyptia n poet al-Busir i toward the end of the
thirteenth century . Buslri compose d this long poem during an ill-
ness of which he was miraculousl y cured by the Prophet , who cast
his mantl e (burda) upon him, just as he had done during his life-
time to the Arab bard Kacb ibn Zuhayr when he recited his qaslda
before him , implorin g his forgivenes s and mercy. 40 The Burda,
written in the high style of classical Arabic, soon became a favorite
with all Arabic-speakin g Muslim s and was early translate d into
Persian, an d later into Turkish and Urdu. Copies are still being
sold in the shops of Lahore and elsewhere . The Burda was trans-
lated into and imitate d in Swahili as well, in which languag e a
remarkable literatur e has grown up around the Prophet' s powerfu l
personality. Twentieth-centur y Arabic poetry, which contain s
39. Edwar d Jabra Jurji, ed. and trans., Illumination  in Islamic  Mysticism  (Prince -
ton, 1938) , pp. 84 ff.
40. al-Busiri , Die Burda,  ed. C. A. Ralfs (Vienna , 1860), with Persian and Turkis h
translations. Th e standar d translatio n is Rene Basset, La Bordah  du Cheikh  al Bousiri
(Paris, 1893) .

--- Page 249 ---
226 / MAN AND HIS PERFECTIO N
"modern" version s of such praise qasidas,  reflects the love of the
Prophet i n differen t styles.
The poet s of the non-Ara b Muslim world have never tired of
inventing ne w and wonderfu l epithets for Muhammad , and the
prose piece s by Ruzbiha n Baqli almost defy translatio n in their
subtlety. Mos t Persian or Turkish diwdns contain, after the initial
orison, an invocatio n of the Prophet and often a descriptio n of the
infra,].*1 I n their qasidas,  the poets often did not dare to express
more than their utter bewildermen t when praising God—th e all-
embracing an d loving, the incomprehensibl e and fathomles s who
reveals Himsel f in contrastin g colors and forms of life—bu t they
would sin g about their hearts' sorrows, their hopes and griefs, in
poems addresse d to the Prophet . Khaqan i and cUrfi, Sana DI and
Ghalib, t o mention only a few outstandin g Persian writers, gave
their best in their nact poetry (nact is the term applied to praise of
the Prophet) ; the personalit y of Muhamma d looms large in Rumi's
lyrics and in his Mathnawl.  In India even a number of Hindu poets
joined th e Muslim s in the compositio n of n(ft in honor of the
Prophet42 (strangel y enough, the first historica l approac h to Mu-
hammad's life , written in Sindhi in 1911, was compose d by a Hin-
du, not by a Muslim). 43 They wrote in Urdu and Persian , com-
pletely adoptin g the terminolog y of the Sufis.
In fact, the qasidas written in Turkey , Iran, Afghanistan , and
India in the name of the leader of mankind , the best of creatures ,
the preeterna l light, the helper of his community , reflect more of
the true feeling of the Muslim communitie s than many learned
discourses abou t mystical prophetology. 44 This is even more true of
the small prayer books, like the Dalcfil al-khairdt  by al-jazul l (d.
ca. 1465), which were compose d in moderat e Sufi style to teach
people trus t in God and the Prophet . And Ghazzal i devoted the
central chapte r of his Ihycf culum ad-din  to Muhammad' s person-
ality. The  love of the Prophet, as it was profoundl y experience d
by the mystics, is and was the stronges t binding force of Muslim s
everywhere, b e they peasants or high officials. Children first learned
4i.Ghulam Dastagi r Rasheed , "The Developmen t of Nactia Poetr y in Persia n
Literature," Islamic  Culture,  1965.
42. Fanl Muradabadi , Hindu shu^ara kd nactiya kaldm  (Lyallpur , 1962).
43. Lalchan d A. Jagtiani , Muhammad  rasul Allah (Hyderabad , Sind, 1911).
44. Annemari e Schimmel , "The Veneratio n of the Prophe t Muhammad , as Re-
flected in Sindhi Poetry," in The Savior God, ed. Samuel G. F. Brando n ( Manchester ,
Eng., 1963) .

--- Page 250 ---
MAN AND HIS PERFECTION / 227
his miracle s from unpretentiou s poems in their mother tongue,
and simpl e villagers could sing of their trust and hope in the Proph-
et in tender verses. 45 Allusion s to the mystica l tradition s about
the Prophet' s light or to the well-know n legends are found on
every leve l of literature , down to lullabie s and bridal songs in
remote province s of the Muslim world. Muhamma d Iqbal stressed
the importanc e of the Prophet in his daring statement : "You can
deny God , but you cannot deny the Prophet." 46
It is Muhamma d who makes Islam a distinct religion, and it is
typical that , in a time when Islam was defeated everywher e in the
political field , and when the Western power s encroache d practicall y
and spirituall y upon the Muslim world, those mystics who founded
new order s and fraternitie s called them tarlqa Muhammadiyya,
"the Muhammada n path." The figure of Muhamma d became , for
them, the center of strength , whether they struggle d against the
non-Muslims o r British in India (like Mir Dard and Ahmad Brelwi
in the late eighteent h and early nineteenth century ) or against the
French, lik e the Sanusiyy a in North Africa. Muhamma d was their
helper, an d in him they trusted when they thought of the future
of the Muslims . This is one of the most importan t contribution s
of Sufism to Muslim life.
45. See also Enno Littmann , Mohammad  in Volksepos  (Copenhagen , 1950), on popu-
lar epics dealing with the Prophet .
46. Iqbal, Jawldname,  verse 608; see Annemari e Schimmel , "The Place of the
Prophet in Iqbal's Thought, " Islamic Studies i, no. 4 (1962); Rals Ahmad Jac£ri, Iqbal
aur ^ashq-i  rasul (Lahore, 1956).

--- Page 251 ---
5. SUF I ORDER S
and FRATERNITIE S
COMMUNITY LIFE 1
Al-mifmin mir'dt  al-mifmin,  "the faithfu l is the mirror
of the faithful"—tha t is a Propheti c traditio n that the Sufis con-
sidered a n excellen t maxim for social intercourse . They see in
the behavio r and actions of their companion s the reflectio n of their
own feeling s and deeds. When the Sufi sees a fault in his neighbor ,
he should correct this very fault in himself ; thus the mirror of his
heart become s increasingl y pure.
The practica l applicatio n of this maxim is clearly visible in the
history o f Sufism and leads to one of the most pleasin g aspects of
the movement , namely , to the fraterna l love that first came into
existence amon g the Sufis of one group and was then extende d to
include humanit y in general . It was a behavio r quite differen t
from tha t of the early ascetics , who stresse d individua l salvatio n
through austerit y and supererogativ e works of piety. 2 Althoug h
the case of Nuri, who offered his life for the sake of his Sufi breth-
i.J. Spence r Trimingham , The Sufi Orders in Islam (Oxford, 1971), is the first
comprehensive boo k on the developmen t and the situatio n of Islamic orders; it con-
tains an extensiv e bibliography .
2. See the example s in Tor Andrae , Islamische  Mystiker (Stuttgart , 1960), pp. 75 ft.
228

--- Page 252 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 22Q
ren, is certainly an exception , one of the main rules valid for the
Sufi is to do good for one's brother' s sake, to prefer others to himself
(ithdr), to give up one's prestige for the sake of one's fellow beings.
The Sufi should break his fasting if he sees a member of the com-
munity wh o needs or wants food, since the joy of a brother's heart
is more valuabl e than the reward for fasting (N 124); he should
accept a gift without qualms because it would be impolite not to
acknowledge gratefull y the trouble the donor has taken in prepar-
ing it. To make one of the faithful happy is to make the Prophe t
happy, as one tradition asserts. 3
Service to men has always been one of the first stages in the
preparatory step s of the Path, but it remains the true Sufi's duty
throughout hi s life. For, "whoeve r excuses himself from the service
of his brethren , God will give him a humiliatio n from which he
cannot be rescued " (N 268).
The Sufi must care for the sick, even when he is extremel y weary.
A typical story is told of Ibn Khafif, who nursed an aged visitor
who was suffering from diarrhea . Even the curse Icfanaka  Allah,
"God curs e you," which the old man flung at his host, became in
his ears a word of blessing and spurred him on in his ministrations .
For, as the visitor grumbled : "If you cannot serve your human
companions properly , how could you serve God?" (X 167). The
Sufi must even be careful about brushin g away the flies from his
face, as they might disturb others in the room (N 277).
A somewha t strange anecdot e illustrate s the tendernes s of heart
every Sufi should possess. It too belongs to the legends about Ibn
Khafif, th e master of Shiraz, whose practica l piety has lived in an
institutionalized for m in the order founded by his spiritual pupil
Kazaruni (d . 1035), 4 who was noted for his social activities .
Ibn Khafi f was once invited to the house of his neighbor , a poor weaver
who offere d him some meat. Ibn Khafif would not touch it, for it was
too rotten , and his host felt ashamed . He then set out for the pilgrimag e
to Mecca; the caravan lost its way in the desert. After days of hunger the
last resort for the pilgrim s was to kill a dog—unclean , and therefor e to
be eaten only in times of dire straits! Distribute d among them, the head
fell to Ibn Khafif as his portion to eat. Then he sensed that this was his
punishment fo r his callous attitude toward s the destitute d neighbor .
[In a later version of the legend, the dog's head speaks and reproache s
3. Tor Andrae , Die person Muhammads  in lehre und glauben  seiner gemeinde
(Stockholm, 1918) , p. 369.
4. For the Kazeruniyy a see Fritz Meier, ed., "Firdaus  al-mursidtya  ft asrdr as-sama-
dlya": Die Vita des Scheich Abu Ishdq al-Kazaruni  (Leipzig , 1948).

--- Page 253 ---
23O / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
the poor mystic for his misbehavior! ] Thus he returne d and asked his
neighbor's forgiveness , and only then was able to perform the pilgrim -
age. (X 44)
This stor y may sound exaggerate d to the moder n reader , but it
shows ho w the Sufi was expecte d to behave—"truthfu l in his mystica l
states an d correc t in his transaction s with men" (N 312). The
manuals o f Sufism are replete with stories illustratin g correc t be-
havior (adab)  in the presenc e of the sheikh an d the brethren . Whole
books wer e devote d to this topic—a n attitud e that has resulte d in
a wholly admirabl e social sensitivit y that has persiste d in the Mus-
lim worl d throughou t the centuries , "correc t behavior " being one
of the basic rules of social life. "Everythin g has a servant, and cor-
rect behavio r is the servan t of religion " (N 91).
The Sufi should always excuse the brethre n and act with them
so that they need no t excuse themselve s (N 96); and he should ex-
tend his love to every created thing. If God is conten t with weak
human being s as His servants , the Sufi should be conten t with them
as brethre n (N 115).
The Sufi s were sure that they belonge d to each other. They had
no secret s from each other and might even practic e a kind of com-
munism comparabl e to that of the first Christians . A dervish must
never say "my shoes" or "my so-and-so"—h e should have no private
property ( N 216, 109). If one possesse s anything , he should give
it to the brethren ; otherwis e he will lose his spiritua l rank (N 169).
How can one say "mine" when he knows that everythin g belong s to
God? Thi s feeling and the proverbia l orienta l hospitalit y have
worked togethe r in shapin g the ideal of the Sufi who will offer
everything t o his guests, leaving nothin g for himsel f or even for
his family .
The Sufis—especiall y those who followe d the same spiritua l
master—felt tha t they had known each other since preeternity ; they
constituted a  spiritua l family. A lovely story told by cAttar suggest s
that they are in reality a corporat e entity :
A man brough t a Sufi as witness with him before the judge; the judge,
however, di d not accept the witness . So he continue d bringin g some more
Sufis unti l the judge exclaime d that this was useless, for:
Every Suf i whom you bring with you—
they are all one, even though you bring a hundred .
For this group has become one body,
and betwee n them the form of I and We has vanished .
(Usi)

--- Page 254 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 231
The love of the Sufis did not end with love of man; it extended to
the animal s as well. The legends tell how lions become tamed in
the presenc e of the soft-hearte d saint, or how a dog is surprise d
when a Sufi beats it. A dog can be sent as a substitut e for a guest
into a Sufi's cell (U 137), and one Sufi even offered the reward for
his sevent y pilgrimage s to the person who would bring water to a
thirsty do g in the desert (N 77).
Out of this social activity of the expandin g Sufi groups, a new
attitude seem s to have develope d that transforme d Sufism from the
religion o f the elite into a mass movement , spreadin g its tenets
to all levels of the population . Just as the Sufis wanted to share
their worldl y property with their fellow human beings, they may
have felt that they should share with them the best they had as
well—namely, th e way leading to salvation .
Gradually, th e preachin g of the Sufis began to attract wider
groups of people. The basic rules of mystical educatio n were elabo-
rated durin g the elevent h century , and in a comparativel y short
span of time—beginnin g in the early twelfth century—mystica l
fraternities tha t include d adepts from all strata of society were
emerging. Ho w the crystallizatio n process itself worked is difficult
to explain ; it must have been a response to an inner need of the
community tha t was not being met spirituall y by the scholasticis m
of orthodo x theologians ; people craved a more intimat e and per-
sonal relationshi p with God and with the Prophet . One cannot
exclude th e possibilit y that the orders came into existenc e as a
movement t o counter the strong Ismaili-Batin i influenc e against
which Ghazzal i had fought so relentlessly . The esoteric interpreta -
tion of Islam, which threatene d its very structure , was, thus, re-
placed by an interiorizatio n of orthodox Muslim teaching .
At the time that the fraternitie s came into existence , the center
of mystica l activity was no longer the private house or shop of
the master . A more institutiona l structur e proved to be necessar y
to cope with the growing number of disciples and adepts. These
new center s were usually called khdnqdh  in the eastern Islamic
world; th e same term was used in medieva l Egypt, where the Sufi
khanqahs forme d cultura l and theologica l centers and were sub-
sidized by the governmen t or endowed by influentia l benefactors .
The word zdwiya, literally "corner, " was used for smaller units,
like the solitary dwelling place of a sheikh. The Turks would call
the Sufi convent tekke. The term ribdt, essentiall y connecte d with

--- Page 255 ---
232 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
the frontie r castles of the soldiers who defend Islam and expand
it, could also be used to refer to the center of a fraternity . Often
the expression dargdh "door, court," is used. The history of Islamic
art can contribut e more to the history of the constructio n of such
Sufi buildings , which were sometime s isolated but more frequent -
ly were connecte d with a mosque, a large kitchen for both the
disciples an d the guests, and sometime s a school. The tomb of the
founder wa s usually located in the same compound—unles s the
compound wa s built later around the sacred place where the first
saint of the order or subgrou p was buried.
In some khdnqdhs,  the dervishe s lived in small cells—th e Mevlana
Miizesi in Konya is a fine example of this type; other convent s
had only one large room in which all the dervishe s lived, studied,
and worked .
The khdnqdh  is the nest for the bird "purity, "
it is the rosegarde n of pleasure and the garden of
faithfulness,
Sana°I coul d already say shortly after noo. 5
The organizatio n of the khdnqdh  was not everywher e alike.
Some khdnqdhs  lived on futuh, unsolicite d gifts or donations ,
whereas other s enjoyed regular stipends . Orders like the Chishti s
in India were extremel y hospitable , and foreign visitors were al-
ways admitted ; in others, strict rules were enforce d about visiting
times and the types of visitors who were allowed to see the master.
Arrangements fo r occasiona l and for long-term visitors were found
in almost every khdnqdh.  The sheikh himself would live, with his
family, in one quarter of the compoun d and see his disciple s at
fixed hour s to supervis e their spiritual progress ; he would generall y
lead the five prayers in the congregation .
We have exact accounts of the Sufi khdnqdhs  in Egypt during
the Mamluk period. The khdnqdh Scfld as-Su^ada3, founded by the
Ayyubid Sulta n Saladin in 1173, was most revered, and "in order to
get blessings, " people liked to watch the three hundre d dervishe s
who lived there when they went out for the Friday prayer. The
sultans gav e rich endownment s to the inhabitant s of "their" khdn-
qdh—daily ration s of meat, bread, and sometime s sweetmeat , soap,
new clothin g for the two Muslim festivals , and some cash. The
khdnqdhs als o enjoyed some tax privileges . They were controlle d
5. Abu 3l-Majd Majdu d Sana 3!, Sand^Pdbdd,  line 289.

--- Page 256 ---
Rembrandt's copy  of a Mogul miniature,  showing the
founders of  the four great mystical orders.
British Museum
 
 Image Not Available 
 
--- Page 257 ---
234 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
by the amir majlis, one of the highest ranking member s of the
military governmen t (comparabl e to the Home Minister). 6
Some of the rules for a person who wanted to enter the service
of a sheikh have already been mentioned . The formerl y more in-
dividual regulation s became stricter, the larger the number of
adepts was , but the main object remained the same for most of the
orders—to brea k and train the lower soul. Only a few orders laid
more emphasi s upon the purificatio n of the heart than upon ascetic
preliminaries. Th e Mevlevis , to mention a prominen t example ,
trained th e novice in differen t kitchen functions ; at the same time
he had to study Rurm's Mathnawl  and its correct recitatio n and
interpretation, a s well as the techniqu e of the whirlin g dance. This
training continue d for 1001 days. 7 Each adept, of course, had to
learn the silsila, the spiritua l lineage that leads from his master
back throug h past generation s to the Prophet ; the pivotal figure
in most silsilas is Junayd. The proper knowledg e of the affiliations ,
difficult a s it may be for an uninitiate d person, is absolutel y neces-
sary for an understandin g of the mystica l tradition. 8
During th e initiatio n ceremony— a festive day in the dervish
community—the adep t had to pronounc e the bayca, the oath of al-
legiance, an d was invested with the khirqa,  the Sufi frock. An
essential par t of the ceremon y consists of the novice's putting his
hand into the sheikh' s hand so that the baraka is properly trans-
mitted. Anothe r importan t act is the bestowin g of the tdj, the
dervish cap . Headdresse s differed from order to order both in shape
and in color, and the number of their parts—twelve , accordin g to
the twelv e imams, or nine, or seven—ha s symboli c meaning . The
tdj and khirqa constitut e such importan t parts of the initiatio n of
the Sufi that even in early times some poets perceive d the danger
of fossilization . Yunus Emre exclaimed : "Dervishhoo d consists not
of frock and headdress " (Y 176). "Dervishhoo d is in the head, not in
the headdress " (Y 520). And in the eighteent h century Shah Abdu Dl-
Latif of Sind advised the true Sufi to throw his cap into the fire
instead of boasting with it.
6. Annemari e Schimmel , "Sufismu s und Heiligenverehrun g im spatmittelalter -
lichen Agypten, " in Festschrift  filr W. Caskel, ed. Erich Graf (Leiden , 1968); Schimmel ,
"Some Glimpse s of the Religiou s Life in Egypt during the Later Mamlu k Period, "
Islamic Studies  4, no. 4 (1965); Virginia Vacca, "Aspett i politici e sociali dei 'sun' mu-
sulmani," Oriente  moderno  35, no. i (1955).
7. Abdulbaki Golpinarh, Mevldna/'dan sonra Mevlevilik (Istanbul, 1953).
8. The only Western work about this problem is the fundamenta l study by Richard
Gramlich, Die schiitischen Derwischorden Persiens, Teil I, Die Affiliationen (Wies-
baden, 1965) .

--- Page 258 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 235
The investitur e brought the Sufi formally into a close communit y
of people with whom he felt like a single body. The remark of
one person , who "wanted to sit with the dervishe s in a khanqah
because 12 0 mercies rain from heaven upon the dervishes , particu-
larly durin g the time of their siesta at noon" (N 294), shows the
admiration tha t ordinary people felt for this close-kni t community .
In fact, a hadlth was coined at that time that promised : "Who
wants to sit with God should sit with the Sufis" (M 1:1529) . And
Ruwaym i s credited with saying that "when someon e sits with the
Sufis and contradict s them in anythin g they have realized , then
God will tear away the light of faith from his heart" (N 95).
The rules of behavior among the Sufis became more and more
detailed—every lim b had its own etiquette. 9 Abu Sacid, who may be
regarded a s a forerunne r of organize d dervishhood , went so far as
to refuse a man who had entered the mosque with his left foot first,
for that showed want of etiquette . The Prophe t had explicitl y
commanded tha t one should enter the Friend's house with the
right foot first (N 6).
When a Sufi decided to wander through the Muslim lands to
visit other communitie s of friends, or to find a master who would
instruct hi m furthe r and perhaps invest him with the khirqa-yi
tabarruk, th e "frock of blessing, " he was to take with him a stick
and a beggar's bowl. Other Sufis were suppose d to receive him well,
feed him, bring him to the hot bath, and, if possible , provide him
with new clothes, or at least wash his frock—accordin g to the leg-
ends, peopl e who neglecte d these duties were severely punished .
In spite of the numerou s rules for correct behavior , a consider-
able numbe r of indulgences , rukhas, existed along with them;
these are exemption s from duties under certain circumstances .
Earlier Sufi s were apprehensiv e of the dangers of such laxities; but
the larger the orders grew, the more frequentl y disciple s found
recourse i n indulgence s \vhen they were too weak to live under
the constan t stress of obligations .
The dervis h would be investe d with differen t offices in the
khanqah accordin g to his progress on the spiritua l path; the hierar-
chical chai n in such offices was carefull y maintained , but it was
a hierarch y of virtue, not of power. The most sincere dervish could
gain the rank of khalifa, "successor" ; he would either stay in the
monastery t o direct it after the sheikh's death or would be sent to
9. cAbdur Rahma n as-SulamI , Kitdb dddb as-suhba,  ed. Meir J. Kister (Jerusalem ,
1954). P- 85-

--- Page 259 ---
236 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
foreign countrie s to preach and extend the order. In the khild-
fatndme, th e documen t given to him at the occasion of his investi-
ture, he was sometime s assigned a special area in which his spiritual
influence wa s needed. In cases in which a successor was elected who
had not previousl y excelled in spiritua l qualities , the sheikh could
transfer hi s lofty qualitie s to his successo r at the momen t of his
death (intiqdl-i  nisbat) and thus endow him with the necessar y
spiritual power .
In her highly interestin g book Istanbul  Geceleri,  "Nights of Is-
tanbul," Samih a Ayverdi gives a lively descriptio n of the investitur e
of a khalifa in the Rifa ci tarlqa in Istanbu l in the early part of this
century. On e can assume that the ceremon y was not very differen t
in other orders. 10 All friends of the order were invited, candles were
lit accordin g to a prescribe d ritual, recitatio n of the Koran and mys-
tical musi c alternated , and after the candidat e had kissed the
sheikh's han d four dervishe s held a veil over the two persons so
that the master might introduc e the khalifa into the secrets of the
office. The whole night was spent in recitations , music, and prayer.
Sometimes a dying sheikh elected as khalifa a member of the der-
vish communit y whom nobody had suspecte d of possessin g the nec-
essary spiritua l virtues, but whom the order was obliged to accept.
Legends the n tell that a green bird descende d upon the head of the
elect, and the dervishe s had no choice but to believe this sign (N
574)—a moti f that is also known from tales about medieva l papal
elections. The khalifa inherited the carpet (sajjdda) or the deerskin
or sheepski n (post), which was the sheikh's ritual place—henc e the
expression post-nishin  or sajjdda-nishin,  "he who sits on the carpet,"
for the successor . Later, the office of khalifa in the main conven t
often becam e hereditary . This led to a deterioratio n of the office and
to an accumulatio n of power and wealth in the hands of certain pir
families, i n whom, in the course of time, not too many traces of true
spirituality wer e left.
Execessive importanc e was attribute d to the sheikh or pir in the
course of time. 11 As early as about 1200, c Attar said:
The Pir is the red sulphur, and his breast the green
ocean,
10. Istanbul  Geceleri  (Istanbul , 1952), pp. i74ff. About the author , a remarkabl e
representative o f modern Sufism , see Annemari e Schimmel , "Samih a Ayverdi , eine
Istanbuler Schriftstellerin, " Festschrift  Otto Spies, ed. Wilhelm Hoenerbac h (Wies-
baden, 1967) .
11. Fritz Meier, "Hurasa n und das Ende der klassische n Sunk," in La Persia nel
medioevo (Rome , 1971), shows these problem s with great clarity.

--- Page 260 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 237
Who does not make collyriu m for his eyes from the dust
of the pir, may die pure or impure .
(U 62)
The sheik h is the master of spiritua l alchem y (kibrlt ahmar, red
sulphur, wa s the mysteriousl y working substanc e in the alchemisti c
process); thu s he can transfor m the base materia l of the novice's soul
into pure gold. He is the sea of wisdom . The dust of his feet gives the
blind eye of the beginne r sight, just as collyriu m enhance s the
power of seeing. He is the ladder toward heaven (M 6:4125) , so
completely purifie d that all the virtues of the Prophe t are visible in
him as in a mirror. Likewise he become s the mirror whom Go d puts
before th e adept and who teaches him right behavior—jus t as one
puts a mirror before a parrot so that he may learn how to talk (M
5:1430-40).
While th e earlier Sufis had quoted the Propheti c traditio n that
the sheik h in his group is like the prophe t in his nation, later Sufis
developed—in connectio n with the overwhelmin g veneratio n of the
Prophet—the stag e of fand ffsh-shaykh  (AD 347), annihilatio n in the
master, whic h leads to annihilatio n in the Prophet . Accordin g to
some orders , on the higher levels of his path the mystic ascends
through th e stations of the Islamic prophets , from Adam to Jesus;
many Sufi s remain in one of these stages, but the perfect sheikh is he
who has become annihilate d in the Prophe t Muhammad . United
with the haqlqa muhammadiyya,  he become s the Perfect Man and
thus lead s his disciple s with a guidanc e granted directly by God
(cf. N4ii) .
The stron g relationshi p betwee n sheikh and murid is exempli -
fied in the techniqu e of tawajjuh,  concentratio n upon the sheikh,
which late r orders, mainly the Naqshbandiyya , considere d neces-
sary for the successfu l performanc e of the dhikr. One speaks in
Turkish o f rabita kurmak,  "to establis h a tie" betwee n master and
disciple. Th e sheikh, too, would practice tawajjuh  and thus "enter
the door of the disciple' s heart" to watch him and to guard him
every moment . Endowe d with knowledg e of things that exist poten-
tially in God's eternal knowledge , he is able to realize certain of
these possibilitie s on the worldly plane.
Faith in these powers of the mystica l leader—which , however ,
often belon g to the magica l sphere rather than to the mystical—i s
still strong . But the implication s of such a faith are dangerou s in
times of degeneration . Some dervishe s would resort to spectacula r

--- Page 261 ---
/ SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
forms of asceticis m and miracle-mongerin g and all kinds of eccen-
tricities in order to attract interest and gain disciple s for their orders
or suborders . This allowed the developmen t of one of the darker
aspects of Sufism in the later period: the sheikh often took advan-
tage of the veneratio n offered him by his followers , most of whom
were illiterate . The history of the political role assumed by mystical
leaders in Islamic countrie s has still to be written. And one enigma
remains to be resolved : how so many of those who preache d poverty
as their pride became wealthy landlord s and fitted perfectl y into the
feudal system , amassing wealth laid at their feet by poor, ignoran t
followers. I t seems that by the early thirteent h century some sheikhs
were spendin g enormou s amount s of money for the maintenanc e
of their followers : Jam! speaks of 20,000 gold dinar a year in the
case of Majdudd m Baghdad ! (N 442). Others put their inherite d
property int o a waqf, a tax-exemp t endowment , bequeathe d for the
living expense s of their disciples .
The influenc e of such "saints" upon the population , who saw in
them true guides to eternal salvation as well as to happines s in this
world, reache d an almost incredibl e extent. Only after studyin g
this phenomeno n carefull y can one understan d why Atatiirk , in
1925, abolishe d the dervish orders in Turkey and why, though mys-
tically minded , a modernis t like Iqbal considere d Pirism one of the
most dangerou s aspects of Islam, a wall that closes off large groups of
Muslims fro m a new and vital interpretatio n of Islamic values.
Even if one does not fully agree with John K. Birge's statemen t
about the Bektash i order—"socia l progress , even the highest moral
progress o f the individual , was impossibl e under the dervish sys-
tem" (BO 202)—on e has to admit that "even if the sheikh is well
meaning bu t ignorant , his influenc e is certain to count for evil."
The mystica l fraternitie s that grew out of a need for spiritualizin g
Islam became , in the course of time, the very cause contributin g to
the stagnatio n of the Islamic religion . People would flock around
the khdnqdh  or dargdh, waiting for help for all their needs, hoping
that the sheikh, or his khalifa, would give them some amulets or
teach them some useful prayer formulae . Indeed, the fabricatio n of
amulets wa s one of the major occupation s of mystica l leaders in
later times .
Even greate r than the veneratio n offered to the living sheikh was
that show n to the deceased masters. All over the Muslim world small
sanctuaries indicat e the places where holy people are buried. In238

--- Page 262 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES /
many cases , sacred places of pre-Islami c religions were taken over,
and, accordin g to the assertion that people always pray at the same
places, Christia n or Hindu places of worship were transforme d into
Muslim sanctuaries , and legends connecte d with the former place
were often applied to the new saint. Many stories—ofte n rather awk-
ward—are told , especiall y in Pakistan , in the Baloch and Pathan
areas, abou t the necessity of having at least one saint's tomb in the
village so that life can properly continu e with his blessing. 12 These
tombs are often found close to strangel y formed stones, to wells,
fountains, o r caves; in many cases they are pseudotombs . Several
maqdms (places ) may bear the name of the same saint—a few years
ago a maqam of Muhamma d Iqbal (who is buried in Lahore) was
erected in the garden of Jalaludd m Rumi's tomb in Konya. At these
tombs, or sacred enclosure s (which give sanctuar y to the persecuted) ,
people tak e their vows, make the circumambulatio n three or seven
times, han g pieces of cloth around the window s or on nearby trees.
Women prayin g for children will go to one place (and, incidentally ,
make of such a visit at a ziydra, "visiting place," a pleasant occasion
of a rare outing); men longing for success in worldly matters will go
to see another saint; children will visit a certain shrine before their
examinations—all o f them sure that the baraka, the spiritua l power
of the saint, will help them. 13
The order s have contribute d to convertin g Sufism into a mass
movement—a movemen t in which the high ambition s of the classi-
cal Sufis were considerabl y watered down. However , the rank and
file of the faithful have been given an emotiona l outlet for their
feelings of veneratio n for the holy man and the opportunit y for par-
ticipation i n festivitie s with music and often with whirling dancing .
The corporat e pursuit of the Way was easier fo r most people than
the lonely spiritua l struggle of the mystica l seeker; the commo n
prayer meeting s gave them strengt h and warmed their faith. It is
interesting t o see how the tariqas develope d collectiv e methods of
spiritual educatio n that could uplift the follower s into a sort of
ecstatic state—th e danger was, however, that this rapture induced by
more or less mechanica l means might be confused with the ecstatic
12. See Sir Thoma s Arnold , "Saints, Muhammadan , in India," in Encyclopedia  of
Religion an d Ethics,  ed. James Hastings , 13 vols. (1908-27) , 11:67-73 .
13. Amon g the genera l works dealing with popula r Islam are Edwar d Willia m
Lane, Th e Manners  and Customs  of the Modern  Egyptians  (London , 1860); Rudolf
Kriss and Huber t Kriss-Heinrich , Volksglaube  im Bereich  des Islam, 2 vols. (Wies-
baden, 1960-61) , with an extensiv e bibliography ; and Cesar E. Dubler, Dber islami-
schen Grab-  und Heiligenkult  (Zurich, 1960).239

--- Page 263 ---
240 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
loneliness o f the true mystica l experience , which is and remains an
act of divine grace with which only a few are ever blessed.
The tariqas usually had a large number of lay members. One may
even spea k of a kind of "third order." Such persons would stay in
the conven t for a couple of days every year to participat e in exercise s
and in the festivitie s of the order, like the maulid,  the birthday of
the Prophe t and the saint, or the curs, "wedding, " the anniversar y
of the saint's death. 14 In many cases the orders assumed , thus, a func-
tion simila r to that of association s (Verein] or sodalitie s in the mod-
ern world ; many are the interrelation s of the dervish orders proper
and the artisans' lodges, the guilds, and the futuwwa  groups.
The order s were adaptabl e to every social level as well as to the
several race s represente d in Islam. Orders are found in the strangel y
mystically oriente d Indonesia n archipelag o and in Black Africa as a
civilizing an d Islamicizin g force, though the mystica l life manifest s
itself quite differentl y in each setting. It should not be forgotten—a s
Dermenghem ha s emphasized—tha t in North Africa the mystica l
groups forme d a very importan t source of spiritual life for the black
slaves, wh o saw in the Prophet' s muezzin,  the Abyssinia n Bilal, the
black confidan t of Muhammad , a prototype of their own situation .
In the rituals performe d in a saint's presence , they could express
their feeling s in music and dance, and their contributio n in these
activities ca n be seen as comparabl e to the religiou s fervor of the
former blac k slaves in Americ a expresse d so movingl y in the
spirituals.15
Their adaptabilit y made the orders ideal vehicles for the spread
of Islamic teachings . It is a well-establishe d fact that large parts of
India, Indonesia , and Black Africa were Islamicize d by the untiring
activity of Sufi preacher s who manifeste d in their lives the basic ob-
ligations o f Islam: simple love of and trust in God, and love of the
Prophet an d their fellow creatures , without indulgin g in logical or
juridical hairsplitting. 16 These preacher s also used the local lan-
guages instea d of the Arabic of the learned and are, thus, largely re-
sponsible fo r the early developmen t of language s like Turkish ,
Urdu, Sindhi , and Panjab i as literary vehicles . They taught the
veneration o f the Prophet , and thanks to them the founder of Islam,
14. Joseph William s McPherson , The Moulid  of Egypt (Cairo, 1941).
15. Emile Dermenghem , Le culte des saints dans I Islam maghrebin  (Paris, 1954),
p. 260.
16. Sir Thomas Arnold , The Preaching  of Islam (1896; reprint ed., Lahore, 1956),
is still the outstandin g introduction .

--- Page 264 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 241
surrounded b y a veil of mystical and mythica l tales, not as a histori-
cal person but as a transhistorica l power, is deeply venerate d from
Indonesia t o East and West Africa, as innumerabl e folk songs prove.
Most of the Sufi orders are identifie d with certain strata of the
population. Eve n in modern Turkey after the prohibitio n of re-
ligious activitie s in 1925, the old allegiance s can still be felt: the
Shadhiliyya orde r was attractive primaril y to the middle classes; the
Mevleviyya—the orde r of the Whirlin g Dervishes—wa s close to the
house of the Ottoma n emperor s and, at the same time, the order of
artists, inspirin g music, poetry, and the fine arts; whereas the rustic
Bektashis wer e connecte d with the Janissarie s and produce d a typi-
cally Turkis h folk literatur e (see chapter 7). The noble Suhra-
wardiyya ca n be contraste d with the Heddawa , a beggars' order in
Morocco, whic h claims descent from the Qadiriyy a and practice s
absolute poverty. 17 Suborder s and small fraction s of orders are
found everywhere—J. Spencer Trimingham speaks of the tffifa sys-
tem; each of these suborder s jealousl y tried to preserve the special
teaching an d the baraka of the founder sheikh or the family baraka.
North Africa , primaril y Morocco , is a good example of this develop-
ment. It is natural that under these circumstance s the orders could
rarely maintai n the high level of spiritualit y with which their found-
ers were credited . But even in our day one witnesse s now and then
personalities who , in the establishe d traditio n of their respectiv e
orders, ris e to great spiritual heights and have been instrumenta l in
awakening amon g Western scholar s and laymen a new interes t in
the best tradition of the tarlqas.
ABU SA'TD IBN ABIDL-KHAYR 1 8
The first Suf i to draw up a preliminar y monasti c rule for
his disciple s was one of Sulami's followers , Abu Sacid ibn AbIDl-
Khayr, bor n in 967 in Mayhan a (Mihna) in Khurasan , a place peo-
pled with Sufi saints. After theologica l studies in Merw and Sarakhs ,
he was introduce d to the mystica l path; the traditio n tells that he
devoted himsel f completel y to the word "Allah" and for seven years
underwent ver y difficult ascetic practices—amon g them, the salat
maqluba, hangin g by the feet into a well or a similar dark place
17. Rene Brunei , Le monachisme  errant dans I'Islam,  Sidi Heddi et les Heddawa
(Paris, 1955) , deals with an outwardl y rather repellen t beggars ' order in North Africa .
18. See Reynol d A. Nicholson , Studies  in Islamic  Mysticism  (1921; reprint ed., Cam-
bridge, 1967) , chap, i; hence the quotations .

--- Page 265 ---
242 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
while recitin g the Koran and prayer formulae . This practice was
performed b y some later Indo-Musli m saints as well, which has led
to the suggestio n of a yoga origin; but as early a witness as Abu Sacid
in Khurasa n seems to contradic t such an idea. 19 Abu Sacld showe d
extreme zea l in asceticism , primaril y in ablutions ; his self-abase -
ment in the service of his Sufi brethren had no limits. People first
admired hi m and then deserted him; at the legendar y age of forty he
reached perfec t illumination . From the age of forty onward he no
longer practice d austeritie s but spent all the money he was given in
entertaining hi s Sufi friends; the emaciate d ascetic enjoyed good
food and became rather corpulent . He was immerse d in an intense
spiritual jo y and tried to share his radiant gratitud e with his
brethren.
Abu Sa cid never performe d the pilgrimage . A saying ascribed to
him claim s that the Kaaba would come several times a day to visit
him, performin g the circumambulatio n above his head—suc h a
claim is also ascribed to other Sufis who no longer considere d the
outward rite s absolutel y binding on one who has reached perfec-
tion. Accordin g to Abu Sacid, "Sufis m is glory in wretchednes s and
riches in poverty and lordship in servitud e and satiety in hunger
and clothednes s in nakednes s and freedom in slavery and life in
death and sweetnes s in bitterness . . . . The Sufi is he who is pleased
with all that God does in order that God may be pleased with all
that he does" (NS 49). Such a state is, of course, attained only when
the Sufi ceases regardin g his own self, the greatest source of all trou-
ble, and is filled with love and longing for God. In the typical anec-
dotal framewor k into which Sufi sayings are put, he heard a peasant
sigh:
If God, when He created the world, had created no creature s in it; and
if He had filled it full of millet from East to West and from earth to
heaven; an d if then He had created one bird and bidden it eat one grain
of this millet every thousan d years, and if, after that, He had created a
man and kindled in his heart this mystic longing and had told him that
he would never win to his goal until this bird left not a single millet-
seed in the whole world, and that he would continue until then in this
burning pai n of love—I have been thinking , it would stil l be a thing soon
ended! (N S 18)
God reveal s Himself as the loving and affectionat e one to the Sufi,
who, in turn, ought to put away whateve r keeps him apart from God
19. For the salat maqluba  see Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, The Life and Times of Fand
Ganj-i Shakar  (Aligarh, 1955), p. 179. Johann Karl Teufel, Eine Lebensbeschreibung
des Scheichs  ^Ali-i Hamadani  (Leiden , 1962), writes of Hamadha m standin g on his
head whil e meditating .

--- Page 266 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 243
and brin g comfor t to his brethren . And Abu Sacld did not think
much of miracles ; he felt that "whosoeve r belongs entirely to the
Giver (karlm),  all his acts are kardmdt,  'gifts of grace' " (NS 66). That
is the same attitude that made him say about the perfect saint: "The
true sain t goes in and out amongs t the people and eats and sleeps
with them and buys and sells in the market and takes part in social
intercourse, an d never forgets God for a single moment " (NS 55).
This idea l was defined later by the Naqshband i mystics as khalwat
daranjuman, complet e absorptio n in proximit y to God in the midst
of a crowd; the perfect mystic's concentratio n can no longer be dis-
turbed or altered by any externa l event or occupation .
Gathering hi s disciples , Abu Sacld founde d a convent, though he
did not organiz e an order as such. For his disciple s he set up ten
rules, whic h were imitate d by many later founder s of fraternitie s
since the y embrac e the ideals of Muslim communit y life.
1) The disciple should keep his garment s clean and be always in a state
of ritual purity. [This rule applies, basically , to every Muslim , for the
state of ritual impurit y prohibit s him or her from reciting the Koran
and from any religiou s action; should he or she die in this state, punish-
ment in the other world would be exacted. ]
2) One should not sit in a holy place for gossiping . [The mosque s had
often bee n used as congregationa l meeting places, where people would
sit and converse ; the womanfol k love to go to the graveyard s not only to
perform piou s acts but to sit there and chat.]
3) The prayer should be performe d in the congregation , particularl y
by the beginner . [Althoug h the obligatio n for congregationa l prayer is
valid onl y for the Friday noon prayer, the Muslim s have always con-
sidered it more rewardin g to pray in a group.]
4) Much night prayer is recommende d [followin g the Koranic injunc-
tions, and accordin g to the practice of the early ascetics . In later times,
meditation afte r prayer was usually practice d in the small hours of the
night, whic h is merely an extensio n of this rule.]
5) At dawn, the disciple should pray for forgiveness . [The so-calle d
istighfar formul a has been used for dhikr since early days.]
6) Then, in the early morning , he should read the Koran, abstainin g
from talk till sunrise.
7) Betwee n the two evening prayers , he should be occupie d with his
recollection (dhikr]  and the speciall y litany (wird) which is given to him
by his master.
8) The Sufi should welcom e the poor and needy, and look after them.
p) He should not eat without another person participating—t o eat alone
is considere d unpleasan t and unlawful ; to offer even the smalles t morsel
to a brother who may be hungrie r than the host is highly appreciated .
10) The disciple should not absent himself without permission . (NS 46)
Abu Sa cld was well aware of the danger s inheren t in the mystica l
path if the disciple was not directed carefull y (hence the last rule).
In his time, the practic e of samd c to incite ecstasy was apparentl y

--- Page 267 ---
244 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
very popular , but for him the samd c was mainly a practical device to
dissipate th e lust of the dervishes , which might otherwis e find other,
more dangerou s ways of distraction .
Abu Sa cid's name is, or rather was, usually connecte d with the
first example s of Persian mystica l poetry. He is the alleged author of
a number of poems in which the ruba'i, quatrain, with its rhyme
scheme a a x a, is used as a vehicle for mystica l thought. We can be
quite sure that none of the quatrain s formerl y attribute d to him are
actually his ; accordin g to his own statement , his love-intoxicate d
teacher Bish r ibn Yasin was the author of such verses— a genre that
later becam e very popular. 20
A true representativ e of early Sufi poetry in quatrains , though in
a popular meter and vernacula r speech, is Baba Tahir, who died in
Khorramabad i n the first part of the eleventh century. 21
Abu Sa cid passed away in 1049. It is said that on his deathbed he
bestowed hi s khirqa to Ahmad- i Jam Zandapil , who was just about
to be born. Ahmad- i Jam was a Persian saint who was the opposite
of Abu Sacld in almost every respect: stern, proud of his mystical
power, drawin g people to repentance , not to love, and often using
his spiritua l strength for revenge and punishment. 22
Abu Sa cid's tomb was destroye d when the wild Ghuzz tribes con-
quered Mayhan a about 1180. By that time, the first real Sufi fra-
ternities ha d come into existence—namely , the Suhrawardiyy a and
the Qadiriyya , which even today are influentia l in large areas of the
Muslim world .
THE FIRST ORDERS
cAbduDl-Qahir Ab u Najib as-Suhraward i (d. n68), 23 the
founder o f the Suhrawardiyya , was a disciple of Ahmad Ghazzali ,
20. Hermann Ethe, "Die Rubacls des Abu Sacid ibn Abulchair," Sitzungsberichte
der bayrischen  Akademie  der Wissenschaften,  philologisch-historische  Klasse, 1875,
1878.
21. See Jan Rypka , History of Iranian  Literature  (Dordrecht , 1968), p. 234, on
Baba Tahir .
22. Vladimi r Ivanow, "A Biograph y of Shaykh Ahmad- i Jam," Journal  of the Royal
Asiatic Society,  1917; Fritz Meier, "Zur Biographi c Ahmad- i Gam's und zur Quellen -
kunde vo n Gami' s Nafahdtu^l-uns,"  Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenlandischen
Gesellschaft 9 7 (1943); Heshma t Moayyad , Die "Maqdmdt"  des Gaznawi,  eine legen-
dare Vita  Ahmad-i  Gams, genannt  Zandapil,  1049-1141  (Frankfurt , 1958).
23. Hellmu t Ritter, "Philologik a IX: Die vier Suhrawardi, " Der Islam 24-25 (1935-
36), deals with the two Suhrawardi s mentione d here and the shaykh  al-ishraq;  see
chapter 6  of this book.

--- Page 268 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 245
Imam Ghazzall' s younger brother. Suhraward i is the author of one
of the most widely read handbook s of mystical education , Addb al-
muridln, "Th e Manner s of the Adepts, " a classic that has been
translated int o the differen t Islamic language s and has often been
imitated.
Even mor e influentia l than he was his brother's son, Shihabudd m
Abu Hafs cUmar as-Suhraward i (1145-1234) , who studied under
him and whose treatise on Sufi theories, cAwdrif al-mcfarif, was—
partly in the Arabic original , partly in translation — even more
widely rea d than his uncle's book and became one of the standar d
works taugh t in Indian madrasas  in courses on Sufism. 24 It certainly
enhanced th e influenc e of the Suhrawardiyy a order, which soon
spread int o India.
Abu Hafs cUmar entere d upon a political career as well; he be-
came shaykh  ash-shuyukh,  the official Sufi master of Baghdad , under
the caliph an-Nasi r at a time when this last enterprisin g membe r of
the Abbasi d dynasty dreamed of reviving the stagnant spiritual life
throughout th e Islamic lands and was trying to unite Islamic rulers
in defense against the Mongol threat. Abu Hafs served as the caliph's
ambassador t o the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt and Syria as well as to the
Seljukids o f Rum, whose power had just reached its apex in their
flourishing capita l of Konya— the place that was to become a new
center of mystical and religiou s life in the years followin g Suhrawar -
di's visit. Abu Hafs cUmar's friendl y relations with the ruling classes
also determine d the attitude of his follower s in India in later centu-
ries; they were usually more open to the exigencie s of the world and
more willin g to accept political participatio n than their brethren in
other orders .
Abu Hafs cUmar helpe d the caliph propagat e his ideas of renew-
ing the futuwwa  ideals; it has even been suggeste d that an-Nasi r
organized the futuwwa order, in part, to diffuse Suhrawardl's teach-
ings.25
 For all practica l purposes , the caliph had institutionalize d
the so-called futuwwa movement, which was closely connected with
Sufism. H e took the investitur e ceremon y of neighborin g Muslim
rulers with the "futuwwa trousers" and headgear as a sign of their
allegiance t o him.
24.cAwarif al-ma^-drif (Bulaq, 1289 h./iSga-gs), at the margin of Ghazzall's Ihya*.
H. Wilberforce Clarke, trans., The "^Awariful-Ma^drif" written in the thirteenth
century b y Shaikh Shahnbu^d-Din  Umar bin Muhammad-i  Suhrawardi  (1891; reprint
ed., New York, 1970), from a Persian translatio n of the Arabic text.
25. Herber t Mason, Two Medieval  Muslim Statesmen  (The Hague, 1971), p. 124.

--- Page 269 ---
246 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
Essentially, the idea of futuwwa goes back to early Sufism. The
fata is "the young man," "the brave youth," generou s and faithful .
The Kora n had called the Seven Sleepers fttyan (plural of fata; Sura
18:10). Halla j used the term for those who excel by their absolute
faithfulness an d loyalty to treaties, including , particularly , Iblis and
Pharaoh, wh o remaine d faithful to their claims. But generall y the
term was connecte d with CAH ibn Abi Talib, as the sentenc e goes:
"There is no fata but CA1I, and no sword but Dhirl-Fiqar."26
The term jawanmard,  the Persian translatio n of fata, is used in
the hagiographie s for many Sufis, often for those who are classifie d
among th e sincere malamatls.  This connectio n is quite likely; and
Sulami, wh o had compose d a treatise about the Maldmatiyya,  de-
voted a treatise to the futuwwa  as well, in which he enumerate d
212 definition s of the true fata. Qushayr I followed him by treating
the futuwwa  in a special chapter of his Risala. "The fata is he who
has no enemy, an d who does not care whether he is with a saint or an
infidel; an d Muhamma d was the perfect fata, for at Doomsda y every-
body will say 'I,' but he will say 'My community ' " (Q 103). On the
whole, on e may accept Ibn cArabi's definitio n that a fata is he who
honors thos e senior to him, who shows mercy to those junior or in-
ferior to him, and prefers those who are his equals to himself . The
Sufi ideal of Uhdr, to prefer others to oneself, is brought to its per-
fection in the futuwwa concept. In the early thirteenth century, an-
Nasir trie d once more to revive these ideas, but without much suc-
cess. Yet futuwwa groups existed in several parts of the Near East,
where the y constitute d an importan t factor in the social life. In Tur-
key, the related groups of the akhi, in which only blameles s men of
respectable professio n were accepted as members , maintaine d the
futuwwa ideals throughout the next centuries; the North African
traveler Ib n Battuta (d. 1368) has told, in his travel account, how
well he was received by these hospitabl e sodalitie s in Anatolia . Out
of them association s like the "socialist " movemen t of Akhi Evran in
the fourteent h century came into existence ; the relation s between
futuwwa group s and the guilds have been studied several times,
though wit h differen t conclusions .
At the same time that the elder Suhraward i laid the foundatio n
26. Franz Taeschner , "Das futuwa-Rittertu m des islamische n Mittelalters, " in Bei-
trdge zur Arabistik,  Semitistik  und Islamkunde,  ed. Richard Hartman n and H. Scheel
(Leipzig, 1944) , and numerou s other articles about this topic. See Taeschner' s article
futuwwa i n Encyclopedia  of Islam, zd ed., with addition s by Claude Cahen. Abdulbak i
Golpmarh, Islam  ve Turk Illerinde  Futuvvet  Te§kilati  ve Kaynaklan  (Istanbul , 1952).

--- Page 270 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 247
of his order, a Hanbalit e preache r in Baghda d was attractin g large
crowds of faithful by his sermons and exhortations , though his
works revea l but little of the lofty mystica l states of which his
contemporaries spoke . This ascetic preache r was cAbduDl-Qadir
al-Gilani (1088-1166 ) from the Caspian Sea, probably the most
popular sain t in the Islamic world, whose name is surrounde d by
innumerable legend s that scarcely fit the image of the stern, sober
representative o f contritio n and mystica l fear.27 He had studied
Hanbalite law with Ibn cAqil and had received the khirqa from hi
teacher's colleagu e al-Mukharrimi , the builder of the first Han-
balite madrasa,  which his disciple inherite d from him.
cAbduDl-Qadir's tom b in Baghda d is still a place of pilgrimag e
for pious Muslims , mainly from the Indo-Pakistan i Subcontinent ,
where the order was introduce d in the late fourteent h century .
These pilgrims , who often stay for weeks, silently walk around with
little brooms , cleaning the sanctuary—t o sweep the threshol d of a
saint is considere d very rewardin g work. A poet may sing that he
sweeps the floor of his beloved with his eyelashes , or a modern Tur-
kish woman , modernizin g and simplifyin g the origina l act of
sweeping, ma y offer a broom at the door of Ankara' s local saint
Hajji Bayram .
cAbduDl-Qadir's fam e soon reached incredibl e heights . He is
called Muhyi  ud-dln, "the reviver of religion. " A charming legend
tells how the pious man helped a weak and destitut e person who
was lying , completel y exhausted , on the road; after he had given
him some sustenanc e and almost revived him, that person revealed
himself to cAbduDl-Qadir a s "the religion of Islam," and hence he
gained thi s honorifi c title (N 519). Strange as the story sounds, it
reveals the admiratio n of cAbdu3l-Qadir's followers fo r their master.
A numbe r of sayings are attribute d to him in which he claims the
highest mystica l rank possible . The author of the Nafahdt al-uns
highly praise s the great saint, who was, according to Yafi ci, the
sheikh of the east, Abu Madyan of Tlemcen being the sheikh of the
west. Yet Abu Madyan spirituall y heard, and immediatel y obeyed,
Gilanl's famou s saying, "My foot is on the neck of every saint" (N
527), admittin g the superiorit y of the Baghda d saint.
A satisfactor y explanatio n of the transitio n from the sober Han-
ay. Walter Braune, Die "futuh al-gaib" des cAbdul Qadir (Berlin and Leipzig,
1933), contain s a translatio n of Gilani's main work; English translatio n of the futuh
by M. Aftab ud-DIn Ahmad (Lahore, n.d.).

--- Page 271 ---
248 / SUF I ORDER S AND FRATERNITIE S
halite preache r (that he was not a pure ascetic is clear from the fact
that he had forty-nin e sons!) to the prototyp e of saintlines s vener-
ated all over the Muslim world is still lacking. The poems in honor
of cAbduDl-Qadir, whic h are sung at his anniversar y in the fourth
month of the Muslim lunar year, reveal the tremendou s admiratio n
of the people for this mystica l leader, who, as a sixteenth-centur y
Turkish son g attests, "recited the complet e Koran every night,
standing o n one leg." 28 He is the ghauth-i  cfzam, "the Greates t
Help," an d the plr-i dast-gir, "the Plr who keeps one's hand" for sup-
port. Turkis h folk poets boast:
I am the honey of his bee,
I am the rose of his garden,
I am the nightingal e of his meadow—
of my sheikh cAbduDl-Qadir!29
Old Sindh i songs describe how his spiritua l realm extend s from
Istanbul t o Delhi, town by town, country by country being blessed
by him. Sir Richard Burton, writing about 1850, says that there were
about a hundred large trees in Sind, all called after Gilani. 30 Each
had a pole and a flag hung upon it to fulfill some vow made in ad-
versity or sickness. Sweetmeat s were distribute d to the poor in honor
of the saint, and the fruit and leaves of the trees were not allowed to
be touche d even by cattle. Proper names like Ghauth Bakhsh, "gift
of the help," in Sind and Balochista n point to his popularity . In-
deed, in folk piety Gilani has become the master of the jinn, and
many haunte d caves and sacred places in the Maghre b are devoted
to his cult. He has also had a decisive influenc e in the Islamizatio n
of West Africa.
Almost contemporar y with cAbduDl-Qadir al-GIlani , and also
living in Iraq, was Ahmad ar-Rifa ci, founde r of an order that ap-
pears mor e eccentri c than the Qadiriyya—th e Rifa ciyya dervishes ,
known as the Howlin g Dervishe s because of their loud dhikr. They
are notoriou s for performin g strange miracles , like eating live
snakes, cuttin g themselve s with swords and lances without being
hurt, and taking out their eyes. "But this is somethin g the sheikh did
not know , nor did his pious companions—w e seek refuge from
28. Willia m Hickman , "Eshrefoghl u Rumi: Reconstitutio n of His dtwdn"  (Ph.D.
diss., Harvar d University , 1972), no. Y 21*.
29. Ibid., no. K 9*.
30. Sir Richard Burton , Sind and the Races That Inhabit the Valley o/ the Indus
(London, 1851) , p. 177.

--- Page 272 ---
SUFI ORDER S AND FRATERNITIE S / 249
Satan wit h God!" (N 532), exclaims Jam! when speakin g of these
"aberrations."
One centur y later—whe n the Muslim culture of Iraq had been
swept awa y by the Mongols—Egyp t became a center for mystica l
orders. Ahma d al-Badaw i from Tanta (d. 1278) 31 founde d a fra-
ternity tha t drew most of its adherent s from the rural populatio n of
Egypt, bu t was able to attract some member s of the ruling Mamluk
house durin g the late Middle Ages. The wife of Sultan Khushqada m
was buried , in 1466, covered with the red flag of the Badawiyya, 32
and durin g the fifteenth century the festivals in Tanta were often
attended b y Mamlu k officers and soldiers (which sometime s led
to disturbance s when the excitemen t grew). A recent novel by
the young Egyptia n writer cAbduDl-Hakim Qasi m centers around
the veneratio n of Sldi Ahmad in Tanta and gives a vivid picture of
the social and psychologica l backgroun d of this deep-roote d cult. 33
The most remarkabl e representativ e of the order is ash-Sha cram, the
last great Muslim mystic in Egypt (d. 1565), whose literary legacy is
interesting a s a typical expressio n of later Sufi thought. 34
The Badawiyy a is a rustic order that has adopted a considerabl e
number o f pre-Islami c customs . Its festivitie s are held accordin g to
the solar Coptic calenda r and thus are connecte d with the Nile and
its flood; signs of old fertility rites are therefor e assimilate d into the
cult. Tha t is why the Badawiyy a never crossed the borders of its
homeland, a s was also the case with an order founded by Ahmad' s
contemporary Ahma d ad-Dasuq l in the same country.
Another orde r that came into existenc e in Egypt at about the
same time , however , expande d widely and attracte d large number s
of followers—firs t in the western part of the Muslim world and more
recently amon g European s as well. It is the Shadhiliyya , which
manifests on e importan t aspect of mystical life, though the attitude
of its masters differs considerabl y from the more emotiona l ap-
proach foun d in at least some of the orders that emerged in the
eastern par t of the Muslim world (with the exceptio n of the Naqsh-
bandiyya, whic h is, in some respects , close to the Shadhiliyya) . This
31. See Ignaz Goldziher , "Aus dem muhammedanische n Heiligenkul t in Aegypten, "
Globus 7 1 (1897); Enno Littmann , Ahmed il-Bedawl,  Ein Lied auf den agyptischen
Nationalheiligen (Mainz , 1950).
32. AbiPl-Mahasi n Ibn Tagrlbirdi , An-nugum  az-zahira  fi muliik Misr wa?l-Qdhira,
ed. Willia m Popper , 8 vols. (Berkeley , 1908-36) , 7:809. See Schimmel , "Sufismus, " in
Festschrift fu r W. Caskel, ed. Graf, p. 277.
33. cAbdu;>l-HakIm Qasim , Ayydm al-insan  as-sab'-d  (Cairo, 1971).
34. See Trimingham , Suft Orders, pp. 220-25, on ash-Sha crani.

--- Page 273 ---
250 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
more sobe r attitude of the Sufis in the Islamic West is probably the
reason for Maqqari' s (d. 1631) somewha t unfair statement : "Faqir-
hood as it is current in the East which discourage s its follower s from
work and encourage s them to beg, is considere d by us as an extreme -
ly hideou s matter." 35 The order crystallize d around Abu Dl-Hasan
CAH ash-Shadhili , a disciple of cAbduDs-Salam ib n Mashish , the Mo-
roccan mysti c whose teaching s survive in a number of Maghreb i
orders, includin g the beggars' order of the Heddawa . Through him
the traditio n goes back to Abu Madyan , the patron saint of Tlem-
cen (d. 1126).
Abu^-Hasan wen t from Spain, via Tunis, to Alexandria , where
he settled and eventuall y died in 1258, the year of the destructio n of
Baghdad an d the end of the Abbasid caliphate . Althoug h he was
apparently b y no means an intellectual , he had an extraordinar y in-
sight into the souls of men and a deep mystica l fire, which he trans-
mitted to the member s of the fraternity . Unlike other mystical lead-
ers (and similar to the later Naqshbandiyya) , Shadhili did not em-
phasize th e necessit y of monastic or solitary life, nor did he encour-
age specifi c forms of vocal dhikr. Every member of the tariqa was
supposed t o realize the spirit of the order in his own life and his own
environment, i n the midst of his duties. The Shadhiliyy a Sufis were
not expecte d to beg or espouse poverty ; on the contrary , the Egyp-
tian source s of the fourteent h and fifteenth centurie s tell how mem-
bers of this order excelled in their tidy attire, quite in contrast to
some of the other Sufis who filled the streets of Cairo. The Sha-
dhiliyya doe s not even have a fully develope d system of mystical
theories. Thei r most distinctiv e feature is that a Shadhili is sure to
be predestine d as a member of this tariqa from preeternit y and be-
lieves that the qutb, the head of the spiritua l hierarchy , will always
be a member of this order. 36
Abu3!-Hasan lef t little written material ; his tendenc y to write let -
ters of spiritual instruction , however , was emulate d by some of his
illustrious followers . The great prayer that he compose d under the
title Hizb  al-bahr has become one of the most popular devotiona l
35. Analecta  1:135, cited in Ignaz Goldzihe r and Joseph de Somogyi , "The Spanis h
Arabs and Islam," Moslem World 4, no. i (1964): 37.
36. Some books have been publishe d in Arabic about the Shadhiliyya , one by
cAbduDl-Halim Mahmu d about the order and one by CA1I Safi Husayn about the
poetry of fourteenth-centur y mystics in Egypt. On the theories of the Shadhiliyya , see
Edward Jabr a Jurji, ed. and trans., Illumination  in Islamic  Mysticism  (Princeton ,
1938), and Jurji, "The Illuministi c Sufis," journal  o/ the American  Oriental  Society,
1937 (the way from Ibn Masarr a via the Ishraqiyy a school to ash-Shadhili) .

--- Page 274 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 251
texts—Ibn Battut a used it during his long voyages , apparentl y with
success.
The studen t of Sufism used to the florid and enrapturin g songs of
Persian mystica l poets will find in the Shadhil i writings a certain
sobriety—the Baghdadia n trend. That is understandabl e from the
sources upo n which the member s of this order drew: Muhasibl' s
Kitdb ar-ri cdya, the fine psychologica l treatise of early Islam; Mak-
kfs Qut al-quliib; and Ghazzali's Ihyd culum ad-din. This so
also distinguishe s the writings of the two masters of the order, two
of the outstandin g figures in the history of later Sufism, Ibn cAta°
Allah al-Iskandaran i and Ibn cAbbad of Ronda.
When AbuT-Hasa n ash-Shadhil i died, AbuDl-cAbbas al-Murs i be-
came his khalifa (d. 1287); he was succeede d by Tajuddi n Ibn cAta°
Allah (d. 1309). Ibn cAtaD Allah provided the Shadhiliyy a with their
classical literature , the Lata'if al-minan  and, even more, the Hikam,
a collectio n of 262 short sayings— a genre not uncommo n in twelfth-
and thirteenth-centur y Sufism—followe d by four short treatises and
a few prayers. These sentence s are regarded as the finest expression s
of Shadhiliyy a ideals, and pious follower s have uttered the opinion
that, if it were permitte d to recite any text other than the Koran in
the ritual prayer one would surely recite the Hikam.  As Pere Nwyia
says so poignantl y about Ibn cAta° Allah : "His hikam are without
contest th e last Sufi miracle worked on the shores of the Nile, and
this miracl e belongs to the Shadhiliyy a and was one of the instru-
ments for their expansion." 37
Numerous commentarie s on the comparativel y small book are
extant; its influenc e extends through the western and central part of
the Islami c world, but is rather less in the Persian-speakin g lands.
Yet one of the leading scholars of sixteenth-centur y India, CAH al-
Muttaql (d . 1556)—otherwis e known as the author of a widely ac-
cepted antholog y of hadlth, the Kanz al-^ummal— has reworke d the
Hikam, as well as its major commentaries , classifyin g the sayings ac
cording to their contents . The concise Arabic style, the short and
poignant sentence s of the Hikam,  enthrall every lover of Arabic lan-
37. Paul Nwyia, Ibn ^Atfp Allah et la naissance  de la confrerie  sddilite (Beirut, 1972),
contains th e best introductio n to Shadhiliyy a though t and also an annotate d trans-
lation of the hikam,  which is most welcom e to Wester n scholars . The first English
translation o f the hikam appeare d in Singapor e in 1937: R. le R. Archer, "Muham -
madan Mysticis m in Sumatra, " Journal  Malayan  Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society
15, no. 2. A new English translatio n of the hikam,  though interprete d from a peculiar
mystical viewpoint , is offered by Victor Banner , Ibn ^-AtiPillah's  Sufi Aphorisms  (Lei-
den, 1973) .

--- Page 275 ---
252 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
guage. Th e wisdom conveye d in them is, to a certain extent, an
elaboration o f the sayings of the great masters of classical Sufism—
one finds similaritie s not only with aphorism s of Junayd, but also
with those  of Hallaj, of Niffari (whose work was studied in Egypt),
and, of course, of Ghazzall . Nwyia has defined the main content of
the Hikam  as a "dialectic of the mystery of God Who is both obscure
and transparent. " Sentence s like the followin g conform exactly to
the classica l meditations : "If there were not the spaces of the soul,
there woul d not be a mystical way, for there is no distance between
you and Him that your foot could traverse"—a n interiorizatio n of
the concep t of the Path, reminiscen t of sayings about the state of
qurb, "proximity, " in earlier sources. "What veils God from you is
His excessiv e nearness. " He veils Himself because He is too trans-
parent an d become s invisibl e by the very intensit y of His light—a
favorite ide a with the Persian Sufis as well, and one often repeate d
in Rumi's work.
The Shadhiliyy a soon extende d itself to North Africa, where, in
the fourteent h century , six differentl y named orders existed, about
which littl e is known. In any case, Sufism in the Maghre b develope d
under the sign of the Ihyff, as Pere Nwyia has correctly stated, an
the final victory of Shadhill ideas was brought about by Ibn cAbbad
ar-Rondi, a  contemporar y of the great North African philosophe r
of history Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406). Ibn cAbbad's Shark al-hikam
made Ibn cAta° Allah' s work widely known in the western Muslim
countries an d exerted a tremendou s influenc e upon the differen t
branches o f Maghreb i Sufism. 38
Ibn cAbbad wa s born in Ronda in Spain in 1332. He studied in
Tlemcen an d Fez, a city that flourishe d under the Merinid rulers.
After a period of solitude and meditatio n under Ibn cAshir in Sale,
he eventuall y became a preacher and imam in the famous Qara-
wiym madrasa  in Fez. There he died in 1390. Accordin g to the
sources, Ib n cAbbad wa s a silent man who adhered strictly to the
tenets of Ghazzali' s and Abu Najib Suhrawardi' s mystical works; he
seems to have led a celibate life. Althoug h he acted as a preacher in
the leadin g mosque of Morocco for many years, his sermons , as far
as they have been preserved , lack brillianc e and emotiona l fire. It is
through hi s writings—th e Shark al-hikam  and the two collection s o
38. Paul Nwyia, Ibn CAbbad  de Ronda (Beirut, 1961), a penetratin g analysi s of the
great Shadhil l master, whose letters Nwyia has also edited: "As-rascPil  as-sugra,"  Let-
ires de direction  spirituelle  (Beirut, 1958).

--- Page 276 ---
SUFI ORDER S AND FRATERNITIE S / 253
letters (fifty-fou r in all)—tha t one gains some insight into his soul as
well as into his method of psychologica l guidance . He modestl y
admits tha t he never enjoyed real dhauq, mystical experience , or
rapture an d immediat e "tasting " of the ineffabl e joy; nor was he
granted an y ecstatic experience—nothin g "but the study of some
Sufi works " brought him to his state. We do not find, in his expres-
sions, that overwhelmin g love that inspired the intoxicate d songs of
many mystics , whose yearnin g grows after every fulfillment . His is
the unquestionin g faith that eventuall y becomes deeply rooted in
the soul and turns into unshakabl e certitude , yaqln. He always saw
himself as ^abd, a slave who constantl y feels his nothingnes s before
God's majesty—no t as a lover craving for union. The "vigilan t fear
of God's ruse (makr)" looms large in his devotion—"i f God gives
you somethin g good He may want to punish you"; therefor e one has
to be on one's guard and not neglect obedienc e and prayer for a
single moment . It is natural that Ibn cAbbad shoul d give a promi-
nent place in his system to the constant struggle against the nafs
"There is no arrival to God but by God, as well as there is no veil
between th e servant and the Lord but his nafs. One does not fight
the nafs by the nafs but fights it by God."
Asin Palacios , the first Western orientalis t to draw attentio n to
Ibn cAbbad's work , in 1933, has seen in him "un precourseu r hispa-
no-musulman d e San Juan de la Cruz." 39 His main point of com-
parison wa s the concept of the Dark Night of the Soul: he had found
in Ibn cAbbad—influenced b y Junayd as well as by the school of
Abu Madyan 40—a certai n predilectio n for the state of qabd, the con-
straint in which God reveals His graces better than in outward gifts
and spiritua l consolation . IbncAbbad, followin g his predecessor s in
the Path, compare s the qabd to the night out of which great things
will be born. It is considere d higher than bast, since man is com-
pletely passive , renouncin g his own will and acting only to the ex-
tent that God makes him act. In this more than in any other mystical
state, he feels his absolute dependenc e upon God, his nothingness ,
and thus is prepared for the highest possible attitude a servant can
reach, tha t of uninterrupte d shukr, "giving thanks, " "renderin g
grace." Th e problem of sabr and shukr,  patience and gratitude , is
solved here , and, followin g the traditiona l Sufi tripartition , Ibn
cAbbad teache s man to thank God first with his tongue, then with
39. M. Asm Palacios , "Sadilie s y alumbrados, " Al-Andalus  9 (1944), 16 (1951).
40. Dermenghem , Culte des saints, p. 71.

--- Page 277 ---
254 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
his heart, until his whole being is transforme d into gratitud e and
every momen t of life consists of gratitud e toward the Lord: "Our
whole occupatio n and only practice should be to conside r God's
kindness towar d us, and to think that our might and power is noth-
ing, and to attach ourselve s to God in a feeling of intense need for
Him, askin g Him to grant us gratitude. " This is the conclusio n of
Shadhiliyya teaching , a teaching that, in its subtlest expressions , is
directed no t to a large communit y but to each individual , inspiring
him to cultivat e his heart until he knows himself to be completel y
in the hands of God, thanking him with every breath for His kind-
ness—even thoug h it may be outwardl y hidden—uplifte d by the
mental praye r during which the heart forgets itself in the divine
presence an d is confirme d in its certitude .
This teachin g appeale d neither to the lower classes, who needed
more excitin g means of getting onto the Path, nor to the poets, but
is primaril y connecte d with the middle class, the officials and civil
servants wh o were trained in the Shadhiliyy a method to fulfill their
duties carefully . It is revealing that one of the few modern orders
that still attracts new disciple s in Egypt, and gives them a thorough
training i n spiritua l education , is an offshoot of the Shadhiliyya , an
order tha t inspired man to a sanctificatio n of his daily life.41
The Shadhiliyy a mystics are credited with having invente d the
use of coffee as a way of staying awake during their litanies and
vigils. Man y mystics of the sober orders still rejoice in coffee as a use-
ful means of attaining spiritua l wakefulnes s and strictly refuse al-
coholic beverage s or drugs that would produce a spiritual intoxica -
tion and thus preclude clear contemplation .
To show the wide range of mystical experience s in the Sufi orders,
we may turn to an order that was founded in the eastern part of the
Muslim worl d approximatel y half a century before the Shadhiliyy a
—the Kubrawiyya . Its founder is Abu3l-Jannab Ahmad , surname d
at-tammat al-kubrd,  "the greatest affliction " (cf. Sura 79:34), which
is shortene d to Najmuddi n Kubra. He was born in 1145 in Khiva
in Centra l Asia. During his training as a traditionalist , he traveled
widely throughou t the Muslim world, returned to Khwariz m about
1185, and was killed during the Mongol invasion in 1220. His tomb
is located in Urgenj.
Kubra wa s a prolific writer; his Arabic commentar y on the Koran
41. See Michael Gilsenan , Saint and Sufi in Modern  Egypt (Oxford,  1973), an ex-
cellent stud y of the contemporar y Hamidiyya-Shadhiliyya .

--- Page 278 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 255
in nine volume s was continue d by his disciple Najmudd m Daya
Razi and then by another prominen t member of the order, 'Ala^ud-
daula Simnani . Kubra's mystica l treatises on the ten stages for the
novices hav e been translate d and commente d on in several of the
Islamic languages ; he followed the example of Sulami and Suhra-
wardi in composin g a book on the etiquett e of the disciples .
Kubra's mai n work is the Fawcfih  al-jamal wa fawdtih al-jalal,
which has been thouroughl y analyze d by Fritz Meier in his excel-
lent edition. 42 The work contain s Kubra's mystical psycholog y and
gives an account of the visions and ecstatic experience s the mystic
may attain . There is no doubt that Kubra himself experience d these
heavenly journey s and traverse d the cosmic ranks in his visions. He
agrees wit h other Sufi theoretician s insofar as he sees man as a mi-
crocosmos, containin g everythin g that exists in the macrocosmos ;
man can be qualifie d with God's qualities , with the exceptio n of the
rank Allah  ar-Rahmdn  ar-Rahim.  But he regards God's qualitie s as
located in special places in heaven, and the mystic who reaches these
points durin g his spiritual ascensio n can incorporat e them in him-
self. These acts are regarded by him as perfectly real, for the "heart"
is a fine body that ascends through the heavens . However , such ex-
periences ca n be realized only after the strictest adherenc e to the
rules of the tenfold Path, some condition s of which are to abstain
from food as much as possible and to give complet e surrende r to the
sheikh by giving up one's own will completely . Included in the
path, too, is the so-called "way of Junayd" : constant ritual purity,
constant fasting , constant silence, constant retreat, constant recol-
lection of God, and constan t direction of a sheikh who explains the
meaning o f one's dreams and visions. Finally, one must give up re-
sistance to God's decree and refrain from prayer for reward in the
otherworld. Thi s is the theoretica l foundatio n of the Kubraw i
order.
Permanent concentratio n upon the divine names in the retreat
leads to mystica l awareness . Najmudd m Kubra gives an exact de-
scription of th e revelation s of colored lights that occur to the initiate
during hi s spiritua l training : there are dots and spots and circles;
42. Najmudd m al-Kubra , Die "fawdtih  al-gamal  wa fawdtih al-galal"  des Nagmud-
dln Kubra,  ed. Fritz Meier (Wiesbaden , 1957), is one of the indispensabl e books for
the studen t of Sufism, mainly because of Meier's detailed introductio n to the though t of
Kubra. Se e also Fritz Meier, "Stambule r Handschrifte n dreier persische n Mystiker :
cAin al-Quda t al-Hamadanl , Nagm ad-din al-Kubra , Nagm ad-din ad-Daja, " Der
Islam 24 (1937).

--- Page 279 ---
256 / SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES
the soul passes through periods of black color and of black and red
spots unti l the appearanc e of the green color indicate s that divine
grace is near—gree n has always been considere d the highest and
heavenly color. 43
The Kubrawiyy a develope d an elaborat e color symbolism . Ku-
bra's discipl e Najmudd m Daya speaks of white as connecte d with
Islam, yello w with imdn, "faith," dark blue with ihsan, "benefi-
cence," gree n with itmfnan,  "tranquillity, " light blue with Iqdn,
"true assurance, " red with *irfdn, "gnosis," and black with hayamdn,
"passionate lov e and ecstatic bewilderment. " Black is the light of the
essence, th e "Divine Ipseity as revealin g light that cannot be seen
but make s see"; it is the color of jaldl, the unfathomabl e divine
majesty, wherea s God's jamdl, His beauty, reveals itself in other
colors. Bu t beyond the Black Light—th e experienc e of which has
been equated with the experience of fand as well—is the "mountain
of emerald, " the color of Eternal Life (CL 153, 160).
There are other sequence s of colors as well, and Kubra admits
that the colors and forms seen by the disciple s can have differen t
meanings an d imports . They may even be of differen t origins—fo r
Kubra, goo d psychologis t that he is, knows that the khawdtir,  the
ideas occurrin g to the heart in the state of retreat, may be of divine
or satanic origin, may stem from the human heart or from the lower
soul, may come from angels or from jinns. Therefore , the disciple is
always in need of a master to instruct him carefull y in the deeper
meaning o f this or that color, form, or thought.
In the state of elevation , the mystic may be able to read heavenl y
books in language s and character s previousl y unknow n to him and
learn the heavenl y names of things and beings, includin g his own
eternal name , which is different from his worldly name.
The Kubrawiyy a chose as dhikr the professio n of faith, which,
when practice d under the stern condition s of the initial retreat,
should wor k not only on the breath but even on the blood and per-
meate the disciple' s entire being. Then the adept will learn that the
Greatest Nam e of God is Allah, or rather the h at the end of this
word.
One of the unusual aspects of Najmudd m Kubra' s psycholog y is
the concep t of the shdhid al-ghaib,  the Doppelgdnger  in the other-
world, wh o may appear to the mystic at certain stages of the Path
43. Johan n Leberech t Fleischer , "Uber die farbige n Lichterscheinunge n der Sufis,"
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 16 (1862).

--- Page 280 ---
SUFI ORDERS AND FRATERNITIES / 257
and is reminiscent , in a certain way, of Suhraward i Maqtul's angelic
half of the soul, which lives outside the body. The Mazdais t idea of
the personificatio n of one's thought s and actions may underlie the
concepts o f both mystics.
It is natural that a mystic who attribute d such great importanc e
to otherworldl y realities should also have develope d a theory of
himmat an d tasarruf.  Kubra, like his contemporaries , held that the
mystic is capable of bringing certain events to pass by directin g his
spiritual energ y toward the sphere of possibilities , just as his spiri-
tual energ y allows him to work upon other human beings, forming
their heart s accordin g to the exigencie s of the mystica l Path.
Kubra implante d his mystical theories in the Central Asian areas,
from whic h they spread to Turkey and India. His disciple Najmud -
dm Daya RazI left Khwariz m before the Mongol s invaded it and
migrated t o Anatolia ; in Sivas he wrote his Mirsad ul-cibad, whic h
he dedicate d to the Seljukid ruler of Konya, cAla°uddin Kaykoba d
—the sam e sultan who gave shelter to Jalaludd m Rumi and his
family during those same years. The Mirsad ul-^ibad became one of
the favorit e books of mystics throughou t the Persian-speakin g world
and was soon translate d into Turkish. 44 It was frequentl y used in
India, so much so that in one of the strange and fanciful apologie s
of Islam against Hinduism , the Hujjat al-Hind,  the clever parrot
who instruct s the princess in Islamic doctrine quotes long para-
graphs fro m the Mirsad ul-^ibdd. 45 A good translatio n of this book
into a Western languag e is one of the desiderat a in the field of Sufi
studies.
Another Kubrawi , cAla0uddaula Simnan i (d. 1336), who had
spent his youth at the Ilkhanid court, was an excellen t mystical psy-
chologist an d philosopher  and is often cited because of his state-
ments tha t question the truth of Ibn cArabf s concept of wahdat al-
wujud (se e chapter 6). He thus became a favorite saint of the later
Naqshbandiyya.46
44. Najmuddi n Daya Razi, Mirsad ul-cibad (Tehran , 1312 sh./iggg) .
45. Ibn cUmar Mihrabi' s Hujjat al-Hind,  not yet published , was probabl y written
in 1645. See D. N. Marshall , Mughals  in India: A Bibliography  (Bombay , 1967), nos.
221, 1809.
46. On Simnani , see Herman n Landolt , "Simnan i on Wahdat al-Wujud, " in Col-
lected Papers  on Islamic Philosophy  and Mysticism,  ed. Mehdi Mohagheg h and Her-
mann Landol t (Tehran , 1971); Landolt , ed. and trans., Correspondence  spirituelle,
echange entre  Nouroddin  Esfarayeni  (ob. 7/7/75/7 ) et son disciple  cAldoddaivleh Sem-
nanl (ob. j)6j 1)36) (Tehran and Paris, 1972), a highly interestin g document ; and
Marijan Mole , "Un traite de cAlaDud-dawla Simnan i sur CA1I ibn Abi Talib," Bulletin
de I'Institut  Francais de Damas 16 (1958-60) . On the later Kubrawiyy a in general , see

--- Page 281 ---
258 / SUF I ORDER S AND FRATERNITIE S
The Kubrawiyy a became the most importan t order in Kashmi r
in the latter part of the fourteent h century , when, accordin g to the
legend, Sayyi d CA1I Hamadhan i migrate d to that country with
seven hundre d followers. 47 Comin g from a high-rankin g family,
Hamadhani underwen t Sufi educatio n as a young boy and wan-
dered throug h the eastern Islamic lands, includin g Ceylon , until
he reache d Kashmi r in 1371. He is the author of several commen -
taries—including a  commentar y on the Fusus al-hikam—and  numer-
ous other books in Arabic and Persian . His influenc e did much to
shape Musli m mystica l thought in the Kashmi r valley, which had
only recentl y been Islamized . Hamadhan i died in 1385 in Swat,
but his order remaine d active in the Subcontinent , though it lost
some of its initial strength in the course of time and was eventuall y
superseded b y orders like the Chishtiyya , Suhrawardiyya , Qadiriyy
and, since about 1600, the Naqshbandiyy a in India. Still, the works
of Kubraw i saints have deeply influence d Indo-Musli m mysticism. 48
Mole, "Le s Kubrawiyy a entre Sunnism e et Shiisme, " Revue des etudes islamiques,
1961; and Mole, "Profession s de foi de deux Kubrawis, " Bulletin  de I'lnstitut  Fran-
fais de Damas  17 (1961-63) .
47. Teufel , *-Ali-i Hamadanl,  contain s a biograph y of the saint. For his mystica l
theories se e Fritz Meier, "Die Welt der Urbilde r bei CA1I Hamadanl, " Eranos-Jahrbuch
18 (1950) .
48. On anothe r leading mystic of the Kubrawiyya , cAz!z an-Nasafi , see Fritz Meier,
"Die Schrifte n des cAziz-i Nasafi, " Wiener  Zeitschrift  fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes
52 (1953) ; and Meier, "Das Problem der Natur im esoterische n Monismu s des Islams, "
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 4 (1946). See also Marija n Mole, ed., Le livre de I'homme  parfait
(Paris an d Tehran , 1962).

--- Page 282 ---
6. THEOSOPHIGA L
SUFISM
SUHRAWARDI MAQTUL , THE MASTE R OF ILLUMINATIO N
The main current of moderat e orthodo x Sufism had been
systematized b y Ghazzali , yet his own works contain views that
were to develop in full in that stream of Islamic theosoph y against
which he had fought so relentlessly . His Mishkdt  al-anwdr,  "The
Niche for Lights," is the book from which most of the later Sufis
start. The clearest expressio n of the light mysticis m that had been
known to the Sufis from early times and was first set forth explicitl y
in this work of Ghazzali' s is found in the mystica l theories of
Shihabuddm Suhrawardi. 1
Suhrawardi was born in 1153 in tne same place in northwestern
Iran from which the founde r of the Suhrawardiyy a order came.
After initia l studies he wandere d through the central Islamic coun-
tries until he was drawn to Aleppo by the Ayyubi d ruler al-Malik
az-Zahir, wh o was fond of Sufis and scholars . But the lawyer divines,
i. Henry Corbin , Sohrawardi  d'Alep, fondateur  de la doctrine  illuminative  (ishraqi)
(Paris, 1939) , was the first of Corbin' s numerou s studies devote d to the shaykh al-
ishraq. Suhraward i Maqtul , "Le bruissemen t de 1'aile de Gabriel, " ed. and trans. Henry
Corbin an d Paul Kraus, Journal  asiatique,  1935, is an analysi s of an importan t short
Persian treatise . See the Bibliograph y for further works, and Hellmu t Ritter, "Philo-
logika IX : Die vier Suhrawardi, " Der Islam 24-25 (1935-36) .
259

--- Page 283 ---
26O / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
afraid of the brillian t young philosopher-mystic , eventuall y per-
suaded th e king, with the help of his father Saladin—th e hero of the
Crusades—to impriso n Suhrawardi ; he died in prison at the age of
thirty-eight i n 1191. That is why he is often called al-maqtul,  "he
who was killed," to avoid confusio n with the two other Suhrawardl s
who playe d decisiv e roles in the formatio n of Sufi orders and the
systematization o f mystica l thought .
Suhrawardi i s the shaykh al-ishrdq,  the master of the philosoph y
of illumination . "What is conceive d metaphysicall y as existenc e
(wujud) coincide s with what is grasped in terms of the root experi-
ence as Light (nur). In this context existenc e is light." 2 The teach-
ings pertainin g to the philosoph y of light were laid down by
Suhrawardi i n nearly fifty Arabic and Persian books. They show
influences an d criticis m of peripateti c philosophy , of Ibn Sina,
and a somewha t surprising , yet wonderfu l combinatio n of Iranian ,
Hellenistic, an d ancient oriental elements . His four large didactic
and doctrina l works culminat e in the Hikmat  al-ishrdq,  "The
Philosophy o f Illumination" ; shorter , and easier to comprehend ,
are a number of Arabic and Persian writing s of which the Haydkil
an-nur, "Th e Altars of Light," has gained special fame. Written
originally i n Arabic , it is also extant in Persian ; numerou s com-
mentaries i n the Islamic language s exist, and a Turkish version
was produce d by Isma cll Anqarawi , the seventeenth-centur y scholar
who wrote a commentary on Rumi's Mathnawl as well. The Ha-
ydkil, lik e
 some other works by the shaykh al-ishrdq,  has been read
in Muslim India throughou t the centuries .
The most fascinatin g of Suhrawardl' s writings are some symboli c
tales and mystica l narrative s in which he describe s the journey of
the soul and his angelolog y in strange and beautifu l symbols , such
as cAql-i surkh,  "The Red Intellect, " Awdz-i par-i Jibril, "The
Sound of Gabriel' s Wing," Lughat-i  murdn, "The Languag e of the
Ants" (alludin g to the Koranic story, often elaborate d upon by the
Sufis, of Solomo n and the complainin g ants), or Safir-i Simurgh,
"The Whistlin g of the Simurgh, " that mystica l bird that, accordin g
to Islamic tradition , lives on the world-encirclin g mountai n Qaf and
that becam e the symbol of the divine in the work of Suhrawar -
di's contemporary , Farlduddl n cAttar. Suhrawardi' s treatise on love
2. Toshihik o Izutsu, "The Parado x of Light and Darknes s in the Garden of Mystery
of Shabastari, " in Anagogic  Qualities  of Literature,  ed. Joseph P. Strelka (Universit y
Park, Pa. , 1971), p. 299.

--- Page 284 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 261
is based primaril y on Avicenna' s book on the same subject. His
wdriddt an d taqdlsdt,  prayers and sanctifications , differen t types of
mystical invocations , reflect the whole range of his mythica l and
religious ideas .
Suhrawardl too k his inspiratio n from differen t Islamic sources,
among whic h the theology of Hallaj must certainly be mentioned .
In fact, one may detect similaritie s between the two mystics not only
in their violent deaths but also in the "divine fire that devoure d
Suhrawardl's soul." 3 At the same time Suhraward l considere d him-
self a continue r of the tradition s of old Iran and ancient Egypt.
He derive s the wisdom of which he consider s himself the true rep-
resentative fro m Herme s (Idris in Islamic sources) . Throug h the
Greek philosophers , culminatin g in Plato, this spiritua l stream
reached Dhu Dn-Nun an d Sahl at-Tustari ; through the Persian
priest-kings i t was transmitte d to Bayezld Bistami and Kharaqam ,
and to Hallaj. Suhrawardl' s attempt to unite the two major trends
of pre-Islami c theosophica l tradition makes his work extremel y im-
portant fo r the student of the history of religion .
Suhrawardl's mai n theories can be summed up in the followin g
quotation:
The Essenc e of the First Absolute Light, God, gives constant illumina
tion, whereb y it is manifeste d and it brings all things into existence ,
giving life to them by its rays. Everythin g in the world is derived from
the Light of His essence and all beauty and perfectio n are the gift of
His bounty , and to attain fully to this illuminatio n is salvation. 4
The ontologica l status of a being depends on the degree to which
it is illuminate d or veiled. The light radiates through longitudina l
and latitudina l orders of angels wh o stand in well-define d relation s
to each other. Suhrawardl' s angelolog y is perhaps the most attrac-
tive aspec t of his work. He sees angels everywhere ; they are as nu-
merous as the fixed stars, i.e., innumerable . In one group of these
angels, eac h angel dominate s a species; they are often called by
Zoroastrian names , since many of their features are inherite d from
the Irania n tradition . Gabriel is the archetyp e of humanity , the
rabb an-nau*  al-insdm;  he can be equated with the Holy Spirit and,
as such, with the preexisten t spirit of Muhammad , the prototyp e
3. Paul Nwyia, Ibn '-Atfp Allah et la naissance  de la confrerie  sddilite (Beirut, 1972),
p. 10.
4. Seyyed H. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages (Cambridge , Mass., 1963), p. 69; a fine study
of Avicenna , Suhrawardl , and Ibn cArabi.

--- Page 285 ---
262 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
and mode l of humanity . All things are brought into existenc e by
the sound of Gabriel's wings, which extend over the whole world.
In additio n to this general guardian angel of humanity , each soul
has its own guardia n angel. For the soul has a previous existenc e
in the angelic world an d "upon entering the body [it] ... is divided
into two parts, one remainin g in heaven and the other descendin g
into the prison or 'fort' of the body." 5 That is why the soul is un-
happy in this world; it searches for its other half and must be re-
united wit h its heavenl y prototyp e in order to become perfecte d
and to become itself again.
The archangel s are located in the Orient (sharq], which is con-
ceived as the world of pure light devoid of matter, whereas the
Occident i s the world of darkness and matter; the two regions are
separated b y the heaven of fixed stars—whic h means that Orient
and Occiden t should be understoo d in the vertical rather than in
the horizonta l sense. Man lives in the ghurbat  al-gharbiyya,  the
"western exile" : fallen into a well in the city of Qairuwan , he longs
for home—fo r Yemen, Arabia felix, the Orient of light—an d tries
to find this radiant place during his sojourn on earth.
The choic e of Yemen, the country connecte d with the right side,
is not accidental—di d not Muhamma d feel the nafas ar-Rahmdn,
the "breat h of the Merciful, " come from Yemen , where Uways al-
Qaranl lived ? Later Ishraqi philosopher s would confron t the
hikmat-i yundni,  "Greek philosophy, " with the hikmat-i  yamani,
"Yemenite wisdom, " which is mystical knowledg e granted by im-
mediate gnosis .
When readin g Suhrawardl' s descriptio n of the "Orien t of the
soul," it is difficult not to think of the dreams of German romanti c
poets and philosophers , who saw in the Morgenland  the mythica l
Orient, th e true home of mankind , the lost Paradise , the goal of
the spiritua l pilgrimag e (symbolized , in our day, by Herman n
Hesse's Morgenlandfahrt).  And the symbolis m of Yemen has
reached eve n the Rosicrucians .
It is clear that the conditio n of the soul after death depends upon
the degree of illuminatio n and purificatio n it has reached during
this life; life is a constant process of striving to attain that primor-
dial light in its purity. The perfect state is granted only to the elect
few, yet it should be everybody' s goal.
Suhrawardl's philosoph y was taken up mainly by Shia philoso-
5. Ibid., p. 73.

--- Page 286 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM / 263
phers and constitute d a very importan t element in Persian philo-
sophical though t in the later Middle Ages. Molla Sadra of Shiraz
(d. 1640) was deeply influence d by Suhrawardia n ideas, and the
Iranians wh o migrate d to India took the philosoph y of ishrdq with
them and taught it in Indian mystica l circles, so that even an or-
thodox mysti c like Mir Dard in the eighteent h century equates God
with light—a n idea that finds a faint echo in some sentence s of Iqbal
as well.
IBN CARABI, THE GREAT MASTER6
Whereas Suhrawardi' s spiritua l legacy remained , for the
most part , restricte d to the Persian world, the influenc e of Ibn
cArabI—ash-shaykh al-akbar,  "the greates t master"—o n the general
development o f Sufism can scarcel y be overrated . For most of the
Sufis after the thirteent h century , his writings constitut e the apex of
mystical theories , and the orthodo x have never ceased attackin g him.
A correct interpretatio n of Ibn cArabi's though t is difficult . The
traditional Wester n view is that he is the representativ e of Islamic
pantheism, o r monism , and that because of such monist theories , he
destroyed th e Islamic idea of God as a living and active force and
was largel y responsibl e for the decay of true Islamic religiou s life.
On the other hand, modern mystica l thinkers , such as Seyyed H.
Nasr, see in Ibn cArabi's wor k a full explanatio n of what was al-
ready understoo d by earlier Sufis. In fact, it is surprisin g to find
how man y formulation s attribute d to him are already found in
the so-calle d "classical " period. It may be that the very fact that
he was more a genius of systematizatio n than an enrapture d mystic
proved helpfu l for the generation s to come, who found, thanks to
him, a comprehensiv e system at their disposal . As even Ahma d Sir-
hindi—usually considere d Ibn cArabi's antagonist—ha d to admit:
"The Sufi s who precede d him—if they spoke about these matters
at all—onl y hinted at them and did not elaborate . Most of those
who cam e after him chose to follow in his footstep s and used his
terms. We latecomer s have also benefite d from the blessing s of that
great man and learned a great deal from his mystical insights . May
God give him for this the best reward." 7
6. See Osman Yahya , Histoire  et classification  de I'oeuvre  d'Ibn CArabI, 2 vols.
(Damascus, 1964) . See also the review by Joseph van Ess in Erasmus  17, nos. 3-4 (1965).
7. Yohana n Friedmann , Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi:  An Outline  of His Thought  and
a Study of His Image in the Eyes of Posterity  (Montreal , 1971).

--- Page 287 ---
264 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
Ibn cArabi was born in 1165 in Murcia, Spain, and was educated
by two women saints, one of them Fatima of Cordova (see Appen-
dix 2). It is said that, during his stay in Cordova , he met Averroes ,
the philosophe r and court physicia n of the Berber dynasty of the
Almohads o f Marrakesh . In Tunisia , Ibn cArabi studie d Ibn Qasyi's
KhaP an-na clayn, "Th e Taking Off of Both Shoes," a book of which
Ibn Khaldu n said, 150 years later, that it should be burned or
washed of f because of its heterodo x ideas. 8 The author of this
questionable wor k had been the founde r of a mystico-politica l
group, th e murldun,  that was involved in an insurrectio n against
the Almoravi d rulers in Algarve in souther n Portuga l about 1130.
Ibn cArabi certainl y studied the works of Ibn Masarr a of Cor-
dova, who , about 900, had spoken about the purifyin g illuminatio n
and who has been classifie d among the philosopher-mystics . Per-
haps the western Muslim worl d was generally more inclined toward
a more philosophica l or theosophica l interpretatio n of religion, as
contrasted t o the enthusiastic , enrapture d attitude of many of the
mystics in the eastern countries—trend s that can be observe d in the
peculiarities o f some of the mystica l fraternitie s as well.
In 1201 Ibn cArabi wa s inspired to perform the pilgrimag e to
Mecca. It was there that he met a highly accomplishe d young
Persian lady . Enrapture d by her beauty and intelligence , he com-
posed the Tarjuman  al-ashiodq,  "The Interprete r of Longing, "
graceful verse s written in the best traditio n of classica l Arabic
poetry.9 H e himself later interprete d the booklet in a mystical sense,
a device commo n to many Sufi poets. Further journey s led the
mystic—who claime d to have received the khirqa from Khidr—t o
Cairo and to Konya, the capital of the Rum Seljukids . Young Sadr-
uddin Qonaw l was to become his foremos t interprete r (d.i274) .
The sheik h visited Baghda d and eventuall y settled in Damascus ,
where he died in 1240; his tomb is a goal for pious pilgrims .
Ibn cArabi has produce d an enormou s number of works, among
which Al-futuhdt  al-makkiyya,  "Meccan Revelations, " in 560 chap-
ters,10 and the Fusils al-hikam,  "Bezels of Divine Wisdom, " have
8. Ibn Khaldun , Shif5^ as-scPil li-tahdhlb  al-masa^il,  ed. M. ibn Tavit at-Tanc i (Is-
tanbul, 1957) , p. 110; Ibn Khaldun' s fatwd against the heretic Sufis.
9. The "Tarjuman  al-ashwaq":  A Collection  of Mystical Odes by Muhyiu^ddin  ibn
al-^Arabi, ed . Reynold A. Nicholso n (London , 1911), with translation , is still the best
available introduction .
lo.Al-Futuhat al-makkiyya,  4 vols. (Cairo, 1329 h./ign) .

--- Page 288 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 265
gained th e greatest popularity. " n The fifteenth-centur y Naqshband i
mystic Muhamma d Parsa compare d the Fusus to the soul and the
Futuhdt t o the heart (N 396); later Naqshbandi s would be more
reserved i n their judgment , if they did not condem n outrigh t the
theories containe d in these books.
The Futuhat were, as the author claims, dictated by God through
the angel
 of inspiration , wherea s the Fusus, a small volume of
twenty-nine chapter s dealing with prophetology , were inspired by
the Prophet . Each "bezel" speaks of the human and spiritua l nature
of a certain prophet ; this serves as a vehicle for the particula r aspect
of divine wisdom reveale d to that prophet . The book became so
popular tha t the poets could play with its title, as did Jami, a great
admirer o f Ibn cArabI, whe n he addresse d his beloved :
If the author of the "Bezels " had seen your lip,
he would have written hundre d "bezels " about the
wisdom o f the Messiah. 12
The lip of the beloved is, in the traditiona l image, as life-bestowin
as Jesus' breath and at the same time resemble s the ruby-signe t
in shape and color. The verse assumes that every reader would be
familiar wit h the content s of the Fusus al-hikam.
A translatio n of the Fusus into a western languag e is extremel y
difficult; th e style is so concise that it reads very elegantl y in the
original bu t needs a detailed commentar y for the non-Musli m
reader. Th e influence s of gnosticism , Hermetism , and Neoplatoni c
thought mak e Ibn cArabi's work s look very complicate d and often
n.Fwus al-hikam,  ed. Abul-Ala ' Affifi (Cairo, 1946); translate d into Englis h by
R. W. G. Austin as The Bezels of Wisdom (New York, 1980). Also see the Bibliograph y for
the work s of William Chittic k and James Morris . Ibn 'Arabl' s fusus were even trans-
lated int o Urdu verse by a pious Indian Muslim in the late eighteent h century ; see
Maulana 'Abda s Salam Nadwi , Shir al-Hind (Azamgarh , ca. 1936), 2:209. The first
scholarly introductio n to Ibn 'Arabl' s work in Europe was Hendri k Samue l Nyberg ,
Kleinere Schriften  des Ibn 'Arabi (Leiden, 1919), an excellen t edition and evaluatio n of
the though t of Ibn 'Arabl , unfortunatel y too little known among the student s of
Sufism. See  also Arthur Jeffery, "Ibn al-'Arabl' s Shajarat  al-Kawn,"  Islamic Studies, nos.
10 and 11 (1959). One aspect of Ibn 'Arabi' s though t is discusse d by Manfre d Profit-
lich, Die Terminologie  Ibn 'Arabls im "Kitdb wasa'il as-sd'il" des Ibn Saudakm  (Freiburg ,
1973)-
12. Maulan a 'Abdurrahma n Jami, Diwdn-i  kamil, ed. Hashim Riza (Tehran , 1341
sh./i962), p . 470.

--- Page 289 ---
266 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
seem to present insurmountabl e difficultie s to the translator . That
is why the interpretation s of his work vary so greatly.
In the first thesis devoted to Ibn cArabi's mystica l system, 13 A. A.
Affifi hold s that he is a pure pantheis t and support s this by discussin g
his theory of love:
Ibnul cArabi's pantheis m is clear, when he says that the ultimat e goal
of love is to know the reality of love and that the reality of love is identi-
cal with God's Essence. Love is not an abstract quality superadde d to
the Essence . It is not a relation between a lover and an object loved.
This is the true love of the "gnostics " who know no particula r object of
love ....
When my Beloved appears ,
With wha t eye do I see Him?
With his eye, not with mine,
For none sees Him except Himself. 14
Ibn cArabI see s the revelatio n of God out of the pure being, camd,
the absolut e inwardness , in the world of created things: "We our-
selves are the attribute s by which we describe God; our existenc e
is merely an objectificatio n of His existence . God is necessary t o us
in order that we may exist, while we are necessar y to Him in order
that He may be manifeste d to Himself. "
I give Him also life, by knowin g Him in my heart. 15
This last sentence is reminiscen t of verses by the seventeenth -
century Germa n mystic Angelu s Silesius or the twentieth-centur y
poet Raine r Maria Rilke. 16 A verse in the Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq  says:
He praise s me, and I praise Him,
and He worship s me and I worship Him.
How can He be independent ,
When I help Him and assist Him?
In my knowin g Him, I create Him. 17
13. Abu 3l-cAlaD Affifi , The Mystical  Philosophy  of Muhyid'Dln  Ibnul- cArabl (Cam -
bridge, 1936) .
14. Ibid., p. 172.
15. Henry Corbin , "Imaginatio n creatric e et priere cr^atric e dans le soufism e d'Ibn
Arabi," Eranos-Jahrbuch  25 (1956): 182.
16. Angelu s Silesius (d. 1677), Der Cherubinische  Wandersmann:
Ich weiss , dass ohne mich Gott nicht ein Nu kann leben;
Werd ich zunicht , muss er sogleich den Geist aufgeben .
See also some of Rilke's poems in Das Stundenbuch  (1903), especially :
Was wirs t du tun, Gott, wenn ich sterbe?
Ich bin dein Krug—wen n ich zerscherb e ....
17. Affifi, Ibnul- cArabi, p . 13.

--- Page 290 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 267
Reynold A . Nicholso n interpret s these theories with the conclusio n
that "correlativ e terms are merely names for differen t aspects of the
same Reality , each aspec t logically necessitatin g the other and being
interchangeable wit h it. Accordin g to the point of view God (ac-
tually) is man and man is God, or God (conceptually ) is not man and
man is not God" (MC 121). Creator and creation are like water and
ice, the same being in differen t modes or manifestation s (NS 99)—
an image that later poets lovingly employed .
Ibn cArabfs entir e system is generall y designate d by the term
wahdat al-wujud,  "unity of being." The correct translatio n of this
expression provide s the key to most of his other theories . His con-
cepts hav e evoked numerou s discussion s about the "pantheistic "
or "monist " trend in later Islam. Marijan Mol£ has put his finger
on the difficult y of translatin g wujud correctly (MM 59-62) : Ara-
bic, like other Semitic languages , has no verb to express "to be."
The term wujud,  which is usually translate d as "being," "existence, "
means, basically , "finding, " "to be found," and is, thus, more dy-
namic tha n mere "existence. " "At the end of the Path only God
is present , is 'found.' " Thus, wahdat al-wujud  is not simply "unity
of being, " but also the unity of existentializatio n and the percep-
tion of this act; it sometime s become s quasi-synonymou s with
shuhud, "contemplation, " "witnessing, " so that the terms wahdat
al-wujud an d wahdat  ash-shuhud,  which were so intensel y discussed
by later mystics , especiall y in India, are sometime s even inter-
changeable (M M 61; cf. N 408).
Everything gain s its wujud, its existence , by "being found," i.e.,
perceived, b y God, and "only their face that is turned to God is
real, the rest is pure not-Being " (MM 97). That would imply that
terms lik e pantheism , panentheism , and even Louis Massignon' s
term "existentia l monism" 18 would have to be revised , since the
concept o f wahdat al-wujud  does not involve a substantia l continu -
ity betwee n God and creation . In Ibn cArabI's though t a tran-
scendence acros s categories , includin g substance , is maintained . God
is above all qualities—the y are neither He nor other than He—an d
He manifest s Himsel f only by means of the names, not by His
essence. O n the plane of essence, He is inconceivabl e (transcendin g
concepts) an d nonexperientia l (transcendin g even nonrationa l cog-
18. Louis Massignon , "L'alternativ e de la pensee mystiqu e en Islam: monism e exis-
tentiel ou monism e testimonial, " Annuaire  de College  de France 52 (1952). Massigno n
has alway s maintaine d that "monism e testimonial " is typically Islamic and compatibl e
with orthodoxy.

--- Page 291 ---
268 /  THEOSOPHICA L SUF1S M
nition). Tha t means that in their actual existenc e the creature s are
not identica l with God, but only reflection s of His attributes .
The main problem of interpretatio n seems to lie in the use of the
term "transcendent, " which in Western philosoph y would scarcely
be applicabl e when speakin g of Ibn cArabI's Go d in words like
these: "B y Himsel f He sees Himself .... None sees Him other
than He, no sent Prophet, nor saint made perfect, nor angel brought
nigh know Him. His Prophet is He, and His sending is He, and
His Word is He. He sent Himself with Himsel f to Himself." 19
This does not sound like a descriptio n of a "transcendent " God.
Both Henr y Corbin and Seyyed H. Nasr have repeatedl y dwelt
upon the nonpantheisti c interpretatio n of Ibn 'Arabi's thought ;
they have tried to show the importanc e of the theophanie s and
the decisiv e role of what Corbin calls the "creativ e imagina -
tion."20 The n the relationshi p betwee n God and creature s can
be condensed , very roughly , approximatel y this way: The Absolut e
yearned i n His Loneliness , and accordin g to the tradition , "I was a
hidden treasur e and I wanted to be known, so I created the world,"
produced creatio n as a mirror for His tajalliydt,  His manifestations .
The "patheti c God" brought into existenc e the named things for
the sake of the primordia l sadness of the divine names. The infinite
thirst of the pathetic God is, in a certain way, reflected in the in-
finite thirs t of his creatures , who long for home— the concept of
khamyaza, literall y "yawning, " i.e., "infinite longing" (the longing
of the shore to embrac e the whole ocean), which plays such an
important rol e in later Indo-Musli m poetry , may have its roots
in these concept s of the mutual yearning of Creator and creatures .
Creation i s "the effusion of Being upon the heavenl y archetypes"; 21
it is as if glass pieces of a mirror were hit by light so that their
iridescence become s visible through this coloring . Or creation may
be compare d to articulation—di d not the Koran speak of the nafas,
the "breath " of the Lord, which is infused into Adam or into Mary
to create a new being? The pure Essence was as if it had held its
"breath" unti l it could no longer do so—and the world appeare d
as nafas ar-Rahman.  As in breathing , so the univers e is created and
19. Nasr, Three Muslim  Sages, p. 107.
20. Henry Corbin, L'imagination  creatrice  dans h soufisme  d'lbn 'Arabi  (Paris,
1958); trans. Ralph Manheim a s Creative  Imagination  in the Sufism of Ibn Arabi
(Princeton, 1969) , a thought-provokin g study.
ai. Nasr, Three Muslim  Sages, p. 107.

--- Page 292 ---
sheikh San can tending  the swine of his beloved.  This
story, found in cAttar's Mantiq ut-tayr and here reworked by the
Chagatay poet Mir CAU Shir Nawffl, is one of the most famous Sufi
tales.
Bibliotheque Nationale,  Ms.
 suppl. Turc. 996The pious
 
 Image Not Available 
 
--- Page 293 ---
270 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
annihilated ever y moment ; it is taken back into its transcenden t
origin jus t as breath is taken back into the lungs. And the great
movement o f going forth and returnin g is symbolicall y manifeste d
in the two parts of the professio n of faith—Id ildh points to the
emanation o f "things other than He," and ilia Allah indicates their
return to  Him, to the everlastin g unity. 22
This creatio n can be seen in various cosmic orders, which are
veiled fro m each other. The divine essence itself is called hdhut
(derived fro m the h, the letter of the essence) , and Ibn cArabi is
said to have experience d the vision of the highest divine essence in
the shape of the word hu, "He," luminou s between the arms of the
letter h 8" ,23 The divine nature revealin g itself is called Idhut;
the spiritua l existence , beyond form, is jabarut,  where the divine
decrees an d spiritua l powers are located . This plane is followe d by
the malakut,  the angelic world, whereas the place of humanit y and
creation i s ndsut. Ibn cArabi an d his follower s insert betwee n
jabarut an d malakut  a sphere called cdlam al-mithdl,  where the
existentialization take s place; this is the sphere into which the high
ambition (himma)  and prayers of the saints reach in order to set
spiritual energie s free and bring the possibilitie s into actual
being.24
The mos t fascinatin g aspect of Ibn cArabi's theorie s is the con-
stant correlatio n betwee n the names and the named ones. Not only
is each of the twenty-eigh t degrees of emanatio n connecte d with a
divine nam e (thus, the divine throne is the manifestatio n place of
al-Muhit, "th e comprehensive" ; the vegetabl e world that of ar-
Rdzi<j, "th e nourisher, " etc.), 25 but each divine name is the rabb, the
"Lord," o f a created being, which is, in turn, its mar bub. The
names ma y be compare d to the archetypes , molds through which
the creativ e energy was channele d to produc e particula r beings.
The rabb,  in His manifestation , remains Lord, and the marbub
remains servant , "who has a Lord," but "God become s the mirror
in which the spiritua l man contemplate s his own reality and man
22. Cypria n Rice, The Persian  Sufis, zd ed. (London , 1969), p. 64.
23. Corbin , "Imaginatio n creatrice, " p. 171.
24. Fazlu r Rahman , "Dream , Imagination , and calam al-mithal, " Islamic  Studies
3, no. 2 (1964-65) ; Rahman' s article is also in The Dream  and Human  Societies,  ed.
Gustave E . von Grunebau m and R. Caillois (Berkeley , 1966), pp. 4ogff.
25. S. A. Q. Husaini , The Pantheistic  Monism  of Ibn al-Arabi  (Lahore , 1970), a
sober collectio n of texts with translation .

--- Page 294 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 2>]1
in turn become s the mirror in which God contemplate s His Names
and Qualities." 26
The idea of the relation between the name and the named one
may have contribute d to the formatio n of one of the favorite sym-
bols of later Persian mystica l poetry, that of the bezel (the connec-
tion with the "Bezels of Wisdom " may have contribute d as well).
The heart of the sheikh was considere d a signet ring on which the
divine name s and attribute s are imprinted , which he, in turn,
would imprin t upon his disciple , who might be compare d to the
piece of sealing wax (cf. MC 287). RumI compare s the mystic who
has lost himself completel y in God to the signet that bears God's
name, and Indo-Persia n Sufi poets carried this idea to the conclu-
sion that "the mind become s blank like the stone upon which the
name of God will be engraved, " so that no name and trace remain
from the worthles s stone, but everythin g is rilled with His names.
Do not seek anythin g from us but the name of
somebody,
like the bezel we are the place of the manifestatio n
of the names,
sang Mir Dard in the mid-eighteent h century , though he, on the
whole, rejecte d many of Ibn cArabf s ideas. 27
The theor y of the names and the named also implies that a
certain for m of faith is designate d for every human being. The
faithful ca n have vision only of the form of faith he professes ; the
Muslim wil l see it differentl y from the Christia n or Jew. We are
reminded o f the Indian myth of the gopis, each of whom saw
Krishna a s the beloved in the form in which she had imagine d him
and which , in a certain sense, belonged to her. For name and named
one are mutuall y interdependent , united through a unio sympa-
thetica.
Ibn cArabi is usually praised as the advocat e of religiou s toler-
ance, and everyon e who tries to underlin e the "mystica l ideal of
tolerance" an d indifferenc e to exterio r forms and rituals quotes
his verses:
My heart is capable of every form,
a cloister of the monk, a temple for idols,
26. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, p. 116.
27. Khwaj a Mir Dard, Dlwdn-i  fdrsi (Delhi, 1310 h./i8g2-93) , pp. 7, 56, 84, 147;
Dard, Urdu  Diwan, ed. Khalll ur-Rahma n Da3udl (Lahore , 1962), p. 118.

--- Page 295 ---
272 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
a pasture for gazelles, the votary's Kaaba,
the tables of the Thora, the Koran.
Love is the creed I hold: whereve r turn
His camels , love is still my creed and faith. 28
But this seemingl y tolerant statemen t contains , rather, a statemen t
about the author's own lofty spiritua l rank: "The form of God is
for him no longer the form of this or that faith exclusiv e of all
others, bu t his own eternal for m which he encounter s at the end of
his tawaf."2Q It is highest self-praise, acknowledgment of an il-
lumination tha t
 is far beyond the "illuminatio n of the names, "
but not toleranc e preache d to the rank and file.
One aspec t of Ibn cArabi's theorie s deserve s special mention :
it is the role attribute d to the female element (the word for essence,
dhdt, bein g feminin e in Arabic, he could speak of the "woma n
creator," th e secret of the compassionat e God through which God
is revealed [see Appendi x 2]). His modern critics define such in-
terpretations as  "para-sexua l symbolis m which abound in his
thought";30 eve n Adam is, so to speak, "female, " since Eve was born
from him . And indeed, it is quite embarrassin g for an uninitiate d
person to read, in the Fusils, the final chapter on Muhammad , the
seal of prophets and saints, where the meditatio n centers around
the hadlth:  "God has made dear to me three things: perfume and
women, an d my heart's consolatio n is in prayer. "
One of the pillars of Ibn cArabi's syste m is the veneratio n of
Muhammad, wh o assumes , in his theories , the role of the Perfect
Man. He is the total theophan y of the divine names, the whole of
the univers e in its oneness as seen by the divine essence. Muham-
mad is the prototyp e of the univers e as well as of man, since he is
like a mirror in which each sees the other. The Perfect Man is
necessary t o God as the medium throug h which He is known and
manifested. H e is "like the pupil in the eye of 'humanity ' " (MC
300, 117) . The Muhammada n reality, haqlqa muhammadiyya,
bears in itself the divine word that reveals itself in its particular s
in the different prophets and messenger s until it reaches, once more,
its fullnes s in the Prophet of Islam. A modern French followe r of
Ibn cArabi has condense d the master's theories about prophetolog y
28. Ibn cArabI, Tarjumdn,  ed. Nicholson , no. 11, lines 13-15.
29. Corbin , "Imaginatio n creatrice, " p. 180.
30. Fazlur Rahman , Islam (London , 1966), p. 146.

--- Page 296 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 273
as laid down in his Risalat al-Ahadiyya,  "About Divine Unicity, "
as follows :
In the Absolute , the Messenge r is no longer the Sent One but the Abso-
lute, he is at the same time the receptacl e of the effusions of the Absolute ,
His Gift; as far as he is a relative being, he is the Illiterat e Prophet and
receptive o f his own aspect of being the Sent one, of Descent or Divine
Revelation; eventually , the Prophet is the active revealer before the
world whic h accepts, by his mediation , the highest message. 31
The Perfec t Man is he who has realized in himself all the possibili -
ties of being; he is, so to speak, the model for everybody , for, in
fact, ever y being is called to realize his innate possibilitie s in ac-
cordance wit h the divine name that is his particula r rabb. How-
ever, only the prophet s and saints reach that level. Iqbal's ideas of
the Perfec t Man as he who has develope d his individua l possibilitie s
to the fullest bloom are derived from these theories rather than
from the Nietzschea n superman .
Even thoug h Ibn cArabi ma y have claimed not to have created
any system , his sharp and cool intellec t certainl y brough t him to
systematize hi s experience s and thoughts , and the influenc e of his
terminology upo n later Sufis seems to show that they accepte d his
thoughts a s a handy systematizatio n of what formed, in their view,
the true essence of Sufism. There is no doubt that this theosophica l
mysticism i s attractiv e because it gives an answer to most of the
questions o f being and becoming , of creation and return.
This syste m is the very reverse of the teaching s of orthodo x
Islam, as a modern Muslim thinke r like Fazlur Rahma n holds,
following th e leading medieva l Hanbalit e theologian , Ibn Taymiy -
ya (d. 1328): 32 "A thoroughl y monisti c system , no matter how
pious and conscientiou s it may claim to be, can not, by its very
nature, tak e seriously th e objectiv e validity of moral standards." 33
For here, both good and evil are from God, and as much as Mu-
hammad i s the manifestatio n of the name al-Hddl,  "who guides
right," so much is Satan the manifestation of the name al-Mudill,
"who lead s astray." Everythin g is in perfect order—tha t is the mean-
ing of God's rahma, "mercy."
Has the
 easy formulatio n of "unity of being" contribute d to the
31. Leon Schaya , La doctrine  soufique  de I'unite (Paris, 1962), p. 68.
32. Ibn Taymiyya , "Ar-rad d cala Ibn cArabl waVSufiyya, " Majmifa  rascPil shaykh
al-Isldm Ib n Taymiyya  (Cairo, 1348 sh./1929-30) .
33. Rahman , Islam, p. 146.

--- Page 297 ---
274 / THEOSOPHICA L SUFIS M
decline of Islam, especiall y in its simplifie d and dangerou s con-
densation a s hama ust, "everythin g is He," which left no room for
the subtle distinction s maintaine d by Ibn cArabi himself ? Was the
transformation o f classical Sufism with its stress on Carnal, "religiou s
work," "activity, " not completel y supersede d by ^irfdn, "gnosis, "
theosophical knowledg e as provided by an ingeniou s system? Hans
Heinrich Schaede r has, in his thought-provokin g article on the
Perfect Man , written in 1925, contraste d Hallaj and Ibn cArabi by
saying:
The fulfillmen t of Islamic revelatio n through complet e loving surren-
der to God, as inheren t in original Islam, and raised onto the level of
full consciousnes s by Hallaj who realized it in his life and in his mar-
tyrdom, wa s replaced , by Ibn cArabi, wit h a systematizatio n of Weltdeu-
tung [explanatio n of the world] which is no longer concerne d with active
but only with contemplativ e piety. 34
One may achieve a profounde r understandin g of the system of
Ibn cArabi now than was possible fifty years ago; but the discussio n
about his role—positiv e or negative—wil l probabl y never end as
long as there are two differen t approache s to the mystica l goal—by
activity an d conformit y of will, or by contemplatio n and gnosis.
IBN AL-FARID , MYSTICA L POET
It has become customar y to mention the name of Ibn
cArabi alon g with that of his contemporar y Ibn al-Farid—a s differ-
ent as the two great thirteenth-centur y masters of Arabic Sufism
were.35 On the one hand, there was the powerfu l personalit y of the
Spanish-born theosophis t who poured out his knowledg e and mysti-
cal experience s in a few poems and in an almost inexhaustibl e
stream of prose works. On the other hand, there was the delicate
poet and scholar from Cairo, who lived a solitary life first on the
Muqattam Hil l and then, for fifteen years, in the Hijaz, eventuall y
returning t o his hometow n and dying there in 1235—fiv e years
before Ibn cArabi died in Damascus .
34. Hans Heinric h Schaeder , "Die islamisch e Lehre vom Vollkommene n Menschen ,
ihre Herkunf t und ihre dichterisch e Gestaltung, " Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgen-
landischen Gesellschaft  79 (1925), p. 237.
35. Reynol d A. Nicholson , "The Lives of cUmar Ibnu Dl-Farid an d MuhiyyuMdi n
Ibnu3l-cArabI," Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society,  1906. The third chapte r of
Nicholson's Studies  in Islamic Mysticism  (1921; reprint ed., Cambridge , 1967), is still
the best introductio n to Ibn al-Farid' s art and thought . See also Muhamma d Mustaf a
Hilmi, Ib n al-Farid  wa^l-hubb  al-ilahl (Cairo, 1945).

--- Page 298 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM / 275
Ibn al-Fari d reduced his mystical experience s to a small number
of Arabic odes of exquisit e beauty in the style of classical Arabic
poetry, bu t he wrote no prose at all. Reynold A. Nicholson , his
masterful interpreter , writes about his poetry: "His style and dic-
tion resembl e the choices t and finest jewel-wor k of a fastidiou s
artist rathe r than the first fruits of divine inspiration " (NS 167).
When readin g his intricate verses, one wonders how they could have
been produced , as the traditio n has it, in a state of rapture. Both
in form and in content these poems are perfectly Arabic: they dis-
play the Arabs' joy in wordplays , puns, and diminutive s and speak
of the love of the Absolut e in terms taken from the pre-Islami c
tradition, callin g the beloved by the names of the heroine s of old
Arabic poetry , like Laila or Salma.
Ibn al-Farid' s poetry has attracted the interest of the Europea n
scholars o f Arabic from the very beginnin g of oriental studies. The
French orientalist s took up the task of explicatin g his highly so-
phisticated mystica l poetry. In 1828 Grangere t de Lagrang e pub-
lished som e of his poems; he was followed by the master of Arabic
studies, Silvestr e de Sacy. Joseph von Hammer-Purgstal l even dared
to translate Ibn al-Farid's greatest poem, the Tffiyya, into what
he thought
 was German poetry; 36 but the meanin g is only rare-
ly captured, and Nicholson ironically says that the Tcfiyya "had the
misfortune o f being translate d by Hammer. " Italian scholars turned
to the same poem in the early twentiet h century—I . di Matteo
in 1917, and Nallin o in 1919. A resolutio n of the literary feud
occasioned b y their different interpretation s was reached by Nichol-
son, who has written the most penetratin g article on Ibn al-Farid .
Finally, th e mystic's work was once more the subject of investigatio n
by A. J. Arberry in the ig5os. 37
Out of Ibn al-Farid' s small Dlwdn two poems have gained special
popularity. On e of these is the Khamriyya,  the "Wine Ode"; it is
a descriptio n of the wine of divine love, which the lovers have
quaffed befor e the grapes were created (i.e., on the Day of the
Covenant), an d which intoxicate s the whole world, cures the sick,
makes the blind see and the deaf hear, and leads man like the
36. Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall , Das arabische  Hohe Lied der Liebe, das ist Ibnol
Faridh's Taije  in Text und Ubersetzung  zum ersten Male herausgegeben  (Vienna ,
1854), a beautifull y printed and illuminate d book.
37. A. J. Arberry , ed. and trans., The Mystical  Poems of Ibn al-Fdrid,  Chester Beatty
Monographs, no . 4 (London , 1954); Arberry , ed. and trans., The Mystical  Poems of
Ibn al-Fdrid  (Dublin, 1956).

--- Page 299 ---
276 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
North Sta r toward his eternal goal. 38 This ode, relying upon a
symbolism commo n to the poets of the Arabic and Persian worlds
alike, can be understoo d and translate d without major difficulties -
much mor e easily than many of his pure love poems, with their
complicated dictio n and subtle imagery . At times, Ibn al-Farid
achieves suc h a tendernes s of feeling, and such a purity of images,
that his verses instantly touch the reader's heart, as in the followin g
lyrical passag e from the poem rhymin g in /:
Every lim b [of my body] sees him, even if he be absent
from me, in every delicate, clear, joyous essence,
In the tune of the melodiou s lute and flute when they
blend togethe r in trilling strains,
And in luxuriou s pasturag e of gazelles in the coolness
of twiligh t and in the first rays of dawning ,
And in misty rains falling from a cloud on a carpet woven
of flowers,
And wher e the breeze sweeps her train, guiding to me
most fragran t attar at sweet dawn,
And when I kiss the lip of the cup, sipping the clear
wine in pleasure and joy.
I knew no estrangemen t from my homelan d when he was
with me: My mind was undisturbe d where we were—
That plac e was my home while my beloved was present;
where the sloping dune appeared , that was my halting-
place.39
These verses , expressin g the feeling of the lover in the constan t
recollection o f the beloved , are among the tenderes t lines in clas-
sical Arabi c poetry and, though studded with rhetorica l ornamenta -
tion, conve y a highly romanti c air.
But the poem to which the orientalists—a s well as the oriental
commentators—have devote d most of their attention is the so-called
Tffiyyat al-kubrd,  "The Greater Poem Rhymin g in T," a poem of
756 verses . Massigno n called it "a heavy tapestry in gold-brocade, "
a "sort of kiswa for the spiritual pilgrimage" 40—just a s the Egyptia n
pilgrims t o Mecca used to take with them a gold-embroidere d black
38. £mile Dermenghem , trans., L'eloge  du vin (al-Khamrlya),  poeme mystique  de
Omar ibn  al-Faridh,  et son commentaire  par Abdalghani  an-Nabolosi  (Paris, 1931).
39. Translate d privatel y by Wheele r M. Thackston .
40. Louis Massignon , La cite des marts au Caire (Cairo, 1958), p. 64.

--- Page 300 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 277
velvet cove r to be hung over the Kaaba, the Egyptia n mystic offers
the spiritua l pilgrims a kiswa woven of words and symbols , weav-
ing and embroiderin g into it the differen t phases of mystical life,
of stations and stages, and—to quote Massigno n once more—finall y
reaching a n "esthetique  transcendantale."
The poet himself declared that in a dream he saw the Prophet ,
who aske d him the name of this qaslda; when Ibn al-Farid men-
tioned a high-soundin g title, the Prophet bade him to call it simply
Nazm as-suluk,  "Order of the Progress, " and that is what he did
(N 542). Poetical inspiratio n is sometime s stronger than logic and
theory, an d disentanglin g the differen t parts of the Nazm as-suluk
is no easy task. A number of passages are of special interest for
mystical psychology , such as the descriptio n of the change in the
senses durin g esctasy:
I knew for sure that we are really One, and the sobriety
of union restored the notion of separation ,
And my whole being was a tongue to speak, an eye to see,
an ear to hear, and a hand to seize.
This idea is elaborate d upon in the followin g verses (580-88) ; it
goes back to the hadlth an-nazvdfil,  in which God promise s his
loving servan t to become the eye through which he sees and the
ear throug h which he hears, as well as to the experienc e in dhikr
in which very limb is engaged in its own recollectio n and the parts
of the body become , so to speak, interchangeable .
One of the most inspiring and frequentl y quoted scenes in the
Tffiyya is that of the shadow play (lines 680-706) :
Lo from behind the veil mysteriou s
the forms of things are shown in every guise,
of manifol d appearanc e ....
Life is seen in terms of the image of the shadow play, and eventuall y
the mysti c discovers :
All thou beholdes t is the act of One.
In solitude , but closely veiled is He.
Let him but lift the screen, no doubt remains :
The form s are vanished , He alone is all;
And thou , illumined , knowest by His light
Thou find's t His actions in the senses' night.

--- Page 301 ---
278 / THEOSOPHICA L SUFIS M
The showma n remains invisible , but the mystic knows: "Everythin g
you see is the action of the One."
Ibn al-Fari d was not the first to use the imagery of the shadow
play; simila r allegorie s are found rather frequentl y in Persian and
Turkish mystica l poetry, for the shadow play, adopted from China,
was a well-know n form of entertainment i n the eastern lands of the
caliphate an d was enjoyed in Baghda d as early as the tenth century .
In early Persian poetry, the puppet s are often called "Chines e
puppets." I t was left to the Sufi poets to see in this play the image
of divine actions in the world. cAttar, wh o once compare d the stars
to the puppets and the sky to the veil, made a Turkish puppet -
player the hero of this Ushturname  several decades before Ibn
al-Farid wrot e his TcPiyya. The play master leads the adept through
the seven veils and eventuall y destroys all his puppets : people accuse
him—just a s Omar Khayya m accuses the potter—o f producin g
beautiful thing s and then of breaking them in pieces and throwin g
them away ; but the master explains that he breaks them to free
them from their outward forms and bring them back into the "box
of Unity," where there is no distinctio n between the manifestation s
of differen t attribute s and names (V 131 ff.; R 42). The closest
source fo r Ibn al-Farid' s imagery is, no doubt, his contemporar y
Ibn cArabi, wh o describe d the shadow play of his world in a touch-
ing passag e of his Futuhdt  al-makkiyya.  Rumi also spoke of the
shadow play , though he rarely used it as elaboratel y as cAttar and
Ibn al-Farid . The motif was then taken up in later Persian and
Turkish mystica l poems; 41 in eighteenth-centur y India the same
image was used, though in more sophisticate d language , to describe
the apparen t contradiction s of life in this created world:
Now the intelligen t people and the traditionist s know: all these puppet
of the contingen t existence s are not more than the manifestation-place s
of the Active Creator Who Does What He Wants, and the whole beauty
of the forms of the worldly creature s is nothing but the opening of the
screen "An d they want only what He wants." Praised be God, even
though goo d and evil are both from Him, but yet evil is evil and good is
good, and the thief comes to the rewards of the theft and the police mas
ter strives to watch, and the string of predestinatio n is hidden from the
view of all, and the player [is hidden] in the screen, and the puppets are
visible.42
4i.Samiha Ayverdi , Istanbul  Geceleri  (Istanbul , 1952), pp. ygff. See Georg Jacob,
Geschichte de s Schattenspiels  (Hannover , 1925).
42. Khwaj a Mir Dard, "Dard-i dil," no. 267, in Chahar  risala (Bhopal , 1310 h./
1892-93)-

--- Page 302 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 27Q
Thus Ibn al-Farid stands here, as he does in all his poetry, wholly
in the traditio n of the mystica l imagery of medieva l Islam. His
poetry ha s often been understoo d as a witness to the pantheisti c
interpretation o f Islam, but, as with many other mystica l poets,
one must not forget that poetry is not to be equated with theoretica l
discussions abou t theologica l problems . When Ibn al-Farid saw the
transcendent unit y of all things, and felt in every movemen t of his
life the hand of the great play master, who calls the puppets into
existence an d puts them again into the dark box, he uses the lan-
guage of the heart rather than that of the head. His love relation
with God , the beloved who is veiled behind the beautifu l forms
of Salma and Laila, is personal , and the mystic's soul, leaving be-
hind it every trace of self-will, reaches conformit y with the divine
will and becomes , thus, as Nicholso n puts it, "the beloved of God."
THE DEVELOPMEN T OF IBN CARABl's MYSTICIS M OF UNITY
The idea s of Ibn cArabi soo n spread throughou t the
world of Islam and gained innumerabl e followers , mainly in the
Persian- an d Turkish-speakin g areas. It is as if the tremendou s
political change s of the thirteent h century—whe n the Mongol s
overrode mos t of Asia and penetrate d deep into Europe, thus break-
ing up long-establishe d politica l orders and destroyin g large areas
of highly develope d cultures—produced , in marked contrast to this
destruction, a n upsurg e of mystica l activity, ideas, feeling, and
poetry no t only in the Islamic world but throughou t Europe and
Asia. In the Islamic world the greatest mystical writers came out
of the thirteent h century— cAttar and Najmudd m Kubra both died
about 1220 , and their disciples , like Najmudd m Daya Razi, con-
tinued thei r traditions ; Jalaludd m RumI represent s the pinnacl e
in the achievement s of Persian mystica l poetry, and in the country
where he spent the greater part of his life, Anatolia , mystics like
Sadruddm Qonaw i transmitte d and publicize d Ibn cArabi's ideas; 43
later, a Turkish poet, Yunus Emre, produced the first truly Turkish
mystical poetry . The orders acquired a firm footing in India, where
the name s of Mucmuddm Chishtl , Baha'udd m Zakariy a Mul-
tani, Farl d Ganj-i Shakar , Nizamuddi n Auliya , Fakhrudd m
clraql, an d many others tell of the spiritua l glory of the thirteent h
43. Nihat Keklik, Sadreddin  Konevi'nin  Felsefesinde  Allah, Kdinat, ve Insan (Istan-
bul, 1967) , the first Turkish study of Sadruddm' s highly interestin g work.

--- Page 303 ---
28O /  THEOSOPHICA L SUFIS M
century. I n Egypt, too, several orders, from the Badawiyy a to the
Shadhiliyya, cam e into being. These are only the most importan t
mystical trend s during a time when the Muslim world, mainly in
its central and eastern parts, was exposed to an almost fatal disaster
on the politica l front.
It may be that the activity of Ibn cArabI and his follower s was
needed to give this widesprea d mystica l upsurge a  framewor k into
which its main ideas could be put: a fixed vocabular y and a com-
paratively simpl e theology . From the fourteent h century on even
those mystic s who did not accept Ibn cArabI's theorie s remaine d
spellbound b y his terminolog y and used it very freely.
Two smalle r theoretica l works have contribute d in importan t
ways to making the great master's major ideas known to a wider
public—one i s Shabistarl' s Gulshan-i  rdz, the other is cAbdu3l-Karim
Jill's Al-insdn  al-kdmil.
In 1311 Shabistari , who lived not far from Tabriz , wrote a
Persian poe m called Gulshan-i  rdz, "Rose Garden of Mystery, " as
a reply to eighteen question s posed to him by a Sufi friend. 44 This
poem is the handies t introductio n to the thought of post-Ibn cArabI
Sufism; it deals with the Perfect Man, the stages of development ,
and mystica l terminology , among other things. Shabistar i describe s
the divin e beauty that is hidden under the veil of every single
atom, becaus e "the Absolut e is so nakedly apparen t to man's sight
that it is not visible" 45—an ide a often expresse d by the mystics :
overwhelming nearnes s blinds the eye, just as unveile d light
becomes invisible , "black." The Perfect Man is, in Shabistarl' s
definition, h e who goes the twofold way: down into the world of
phenomena, the n upward to the light and divine unity. This idea
continued a s the central theory of most of the Sufi orders; it was
developed befor e Ibn cArabi and his followers , but it had not yet
been couche d in terminolog y that would enable it to be under-
stood by the average Sufi. The mystics generally experience d this
movement a s divided into forty steps—twent y downwar d from the
First Intelligenc e to earth, and then the twenty-ste p "arc of ascent"
toward th e Perfect Man. These ideas—derive d from Neoplatoni c
speculations—became s o common in the mystica l fraternitie s that
even a rather unsophisticate d order like the Turkish Bektashi s
44. Muhamma d Lahiji, Mafdtlh  al-icjaz ft shark gulshan-i  rdz, ed. Kaiwan Sami cl
(Tehran, 133 7 sh./igsS) .
45. Izutsu , "Parado x of Light and Darkness, " in Anagogic  Qualities  of Literature,
ed. Strelka , p. 297.

--- Page 304 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM / 281
dwelt, in its so-called devriye poems, on the circles describin g the
"outward track " and the "homewar d track" (BO 116).
Shabistari's Gulshan-i  rdz gave impetus to the spread of these
ideas, especiall y when it was used with Lahiji's excellen t commen -
tary, compose d in the second half of the fifteenth century . For the
Nicmatullahi dervishe s in Iran, the book "served (and perhaps still
serves) as a traditiona l manual for all those men or women (in-
structed i n separat e groups) who came under their directio n in a
kind of Third Order." 46 Its popularit y in the East made it interest-
ing to Western scholars as well. It is one of the first books on Sufism
that was translate d into Western languages : into German by Ham-
mer-Purgstall i n 1838 (almost as unsuccessfull y as his translation s
from Ibn al-Farid) , and into English by E. H. Whinfiel d in i88o. 47
Its form and content inspired Muhamma d Iqbal to compos e his
Gulshan-i rdz-i  jadld, "The New Rose Garden of Mystery, " pub-
lished in 1927; in this poem he follows Shabistari' s notions and
offers his own solution s to the question s of the Perfect Man (one
of his central ideas), of God, and of destiny.
In the field of mystica l theory, Jill (d. after 1408)—a descendan t
of the founder of the Qadiriyy a order—di d his utmost to systematiz e
the thought s of Ibn cArabi, thoug h at certain points he differed
from him. 48 His book Al-insdn  al-kdmil,  "The Perfect Man," has
been carefull y analyze d by Reynol d A. Nicholson . Jill discusse d
thoroughly th e differen t levels of divine manifestation s and the
revelations o f the divine—fro m the plane of essence to the plane of
the attributes , the plane of actions, the plane of similitude , and the
plane of sense and color vision, thus distinguishin g the differen t
levels of mystica l revelatio n (tajalll}.  The illuminatio n of the ac-
tions is followed by that of the names, then by that of the attributes ,
and eventuall y every experienc e is terminate d in the illuminatio n
of the essence, which only the Perfect Man can reach.
46. Rice, Persian  Sufis, p. 28. On the Nicmatullahi se e Richar d Gramlich , Die
scliiitischen Derwischorden  Persiens,  Teil I, Die Affiliationen  (Wiesbaden , 1965); on
their founder , see Jean Aubin, Materiaux  pour la biographic  de Shah Nfimatulldh
Walt Kermarii  (Tehran and Paris, 1956).
47. Mahmu d Shabistari , The Rose-Garden  of Mysteries,  ed. and trans. Edward
Henry Whinfiel d (London , 1880). Shabistari , The Dialogue  of the Gulshan-i  Rdz
(London, 1887) ; Shabistari , The Secret Garden,  trans. Juraj Paska (New York and
London, 1969) .
48. The best introductio n is still the second chapter of Nicholson' s Studies.  Ernst
Bannerth, "Da s Buch der 40 Stufen von cAbd al-Kari m al-Gili, " Osterreichische
Akademie de r Wissenschaften,  philologisch-historische  Klasse 230, no. 3 (1956). cAbdul
Karim al-Jill , Al-insdn  al-kdmil,  2 vols. (Cairo, 1340 h./1921-22) .

--- Page 305 ---
282 / THEOSOPHICA L SUFIS M
In theorie s like this, the central concept of Sufism, and of Islam
in general , tauhld, is eventuall y understoo d as "the extinctio n of the
ignorance o f our essentia l and unmovabl e identity with the only
Real."49 I t is no longer a unity of will, but a lifting of the veils of
ignorance: a  decisive differenc e in the whole approac h to the prob-
lems of God and the world—eve n though Jill admits that the Lord
remains Lord , and the slave remains slave.
The longin g for the Perfect Man, theoreticall y explaine d in Ibn
cArabi's an d Jill's work, is much older than these theories 50—the
veneration offere d to the Prophe t shows this. It seems typical that
Ibn cArabi's younge r contemporary , Jalaludd m Rumi, twice took
up in his poetry the story of Diogenes , who searche d with a lantern
for "man" (M 5: 2887; D 441). Rumi probabl y did not think of the
implications o f a cosmic power embodie d in this ideal man or of
the possibl e relation s between this perfect human being and gnostic
concepts o f the Primordia l Man (Urmensch).  When reading his
statements, on e should remember tha t the Sufis frequentl y regarde d
the commo n people as somethin g "like animals " (kcfl-arfam),  re-
lying upo n Korani c statement s like that in Sura 7:178 about those
who do not hear or see the signs of divine power and grace. Only
the true "man" can experienc e the vision of God throug h and
behind Hi s creation .
The elaboratio n of these theories could lead to the consequence s
reflected i n the utterance s of some Persian and Turkis h mystica l
poets wh o combine d the feeling of all-pervadin g unity with the
boast of having reached the station of the Perfect Man themselves .
The verse s of writers like Maghrib ! and similar poets of fifteenth -
century Ira n show this tendenc y very clearly: the mystic feels that
he embrace s everythin g in himself ; he experience s not only a cos-
mic consciousnes s but also a unity with all those who have lived
before hi m and are living togethe r with him, with Moses and with
Pharaoh, wit h Jonah and with the whale, with Hallaj and with his
judge. Thi s is the general trend in much of the later popular  mysti-
cal poetry that has led the interpreter s to see here nothing but im-
moderate pantheism .
Orthodox Sufi s would speak here of the kufr-i tarlqat,  a state of
intoxication i n which the mystic is no longer aware of anythin g
49. Schaya , Doctrine  soufique,  p. 38.
50. Louis Massignon , "L'homm e parfait en Islam et son originalite " eschatologique, "
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 5 (1947).

--- Page 306 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFIS M / 283
except Go d and in which he sees everythin g as one; but this is not
the last stage he can reach. The classica l distinctio n of "intoxica -
tion" as precedin g the "second sobriety " remains valid, althoug h
most of the later Sufis remaine d in the "lower" state.
For these poets, the whole world was filled with God—whethe r
or not they thought of the theoretica l implications . The phrase
hama ust,  "everythin g is He," can be found as early as cAttar's poet -
ry, even before Ibn cArabI (cf. U 223). In the late fifteenth century
Jam! was to exclaim :
Neighbor an d associate and companion—everythin g
is He.
In the beggar's coarse frock and in the king's silk—
everything i s He.
In the crowd of separatio n and in the lonelines s of
collectedness
By God! everythin g is He, and by God! everythin g is He.51
For some mystics the faith in God's manifestatio n in every shape
led to strange excesses . Some of them would experienc e an ecstatic
state whe n they heard the sound of the wind or a bird (L 495);
they migh t even answer a sheep's bleating with the words, "Here,
at Thy service! " (B 355); they might run after a camel in which
they saw a manifestatio n of God, or touch a snake because "there
is nothing but God." In the latter case, the sheikh wisely told his
disciple no t to do such things any more, for the snake shows God
under the veil of wrath, and the disciple is still too weak to draw
close to this divine manifestatio n (N 261).
The feelin g that God is everywhere , inherent in everything , is
beautifully expresse d in many of Jami's verses, which summariz e
the mystica l feeling of his time:
Sometimes w e call Thee wine, sometime s goblet,
Sometimes w e call Thee corn, and sometime s snare,
There is no letter save Thy name on the tablet of the
world—
Now: by which name shall we call Thee? 52
Si.Maulana c Abdurrahman Jami , Lawo?ih  (Tehran, 1342 sh./iQftg) , chap. 21; see
the Englis h translatio n by Edward Henry Whinfiel d and Mirza Muhamma d Kazwin i
(London, 1914) .
52. Maulan a cAbdurrahman Jami , Dlwan-i kamil, ed. Hashim Riza (Tehran , 1341
sh./ig62), p . 810.

--- Page 307 ---
284 / THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
Two centurie s later, Dara Shikoh would take up this thought in his
mystical poetry , when he changed the formula "in the name of God
the Mercifu l the Compassionate " into the words:
In the name of Him Who has no name,
Who appear s by whateve r name you will call Him.
The feelin g of the essentia l unity of God and man, theoreticall y
underlined b y Ibn cArabi and his followers , has been expresse d by
the poets through differen t symbols ; they like to speak of the ocean,
the billows , the foam, and the drop, which in each instanc e look
different an d yet are the same water. Niffari seems to have been
the first to use the symbolis m of the divine ocean. Ibn cArabi ha d
visualized th e divine essence as a large green ocean out of which
the fleetin g forms emerge like waves, to fall again and disappea r in
the fathomles s depths. 53 Rumi emulate d him in many of his poems,
which spea k of the ocean of God. But the image is found much
earlier: everyon e who meditate d upon the similaritie s and differ-
ences betwee n God and the world and wanted to illustrat e their
basic unit y and tempora l differentiation , would use the image of
the ocean , which, psychologically , symbolize s so perfectl y the long-
ing of the individua l for union and annihilatio n in the whole. 54
Later poetr y abound s in ocean imagery . Even those poets who did
not accep t Ibn cArabi's wahdat  al-wujud  have used it, though in
their imager y the drop does not vanish in the sea but become s a
precious pear l (accordin g to oriental folklore , pearls are raindrops ,
preferably drop s of April rain, that rest in the oyster to mature) ;
the pearl gains its value by its journey from the sea through the
cloud and the drop back to its home, changed into a jewel, unable
to live withou t the ocean and yet distinct from it. Those who
equated th e divine essence with dynami c love could easily extend
the imag e of the ocean of love, of which intellectua l knowledg e
is only the dry shore. It is an ocean filled with dangerou s beasts,
alligators an d whales , which threaten the loving soul, or it is made
of consumin g fire (MT 222). God's majesty and His power, as well
as His beauty, are revealed in this ocean.
The ocean  and the drop of water offered themselve s as apt sym-
53. See Reynold A. Nicholson , Selected Poems from the Divan-i  Shams-i Tabriz
(1898; reprin t ed., Cambridge , 1961), no. 9.
54. Toshihik o Izutsu, "The Basic Structur e of Metaphysica l Thinkin g in Islam,"
in Collected  Papers on Islamic Philosophy  and Mysticism,  ed. Mehdi Mohagheg h and
Hermann Landol t (Tehran , 1971), p. 67.

--- Page 308 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM / 285
bols for the relationshi p of the individua l soul to the divine, but
other image s as well were used to point to this insolubl e paradox
of unity and multiplicity : glass pieces that are from the same
substance an d yet show differen t shapes and colors (V 137); chess
figures tha t are carved from the same piece of wood (as the Taoists
would compar e the Tao to a block of uncarve d wood) and yet
fight agains t each other seemed to be a fitting symbol for unity of
being, as seen by a sixteenth-centur y Malayan Sufi.55 But long before
him, the image of God as the great chess player, who moves the
figures in inexplicabl e ways so that the pawn may become a king,
was widel y used in Iran—smal l wonder in a culture in which chess
has playe d a central role since early times.
The imager y of chess and the nard play (a kind of backgammo n
in which the most hopeless position is called shashdar,  "six doors,"
and could thus be used by the Sufis to allude to those who are
imprisoned i n the "six walls" of the created world) still leaves
room for a differentiatio n betwee n the play master and the figures,
and such differentiatio n is also often maintaine d in Jami's poetry.
Though a  great admirer of Ibn cArabi, he could not deny his affilia-
tion with the Nayshbandiyy a school (see chapter 8). Where the
strict Ibn cArabi schoo l sometime s speaks of the mutual dependenc e
of God and His creatures , Jam! states:
We and Thou are not separate from each other,
but we need Thee, whereas Thou doest not need us.56
For "that which is fettered in created forms is in need of the Abso-
lute, but the Absolut e is independen t of the relative. " In spite of
this importan t differenc e from Ibn cArabi's position , Jam! has often
praised th e all-embracin g unity; and the poets, who were rarely
aware of the fine, but decisive distinctions , continue d singing of
this all-pervadin g unity behind the various forms: a unity in which
lover, beloved , and love are one, so that neither separatio n nor
union ha s any meaning .
SanaDI addresse d God, in the proem of his Hadlqa,  with the words:
Infidelity an d faith both wander along thy Path saying:
"He alone , without any associate! "
(S6o)
55-Al-Attas, Hamza  al-Fansurl,  p. 412.
56. Jami, Lawd^ih,  no. 20.

--- Page 309 ---
286 /  THEOSOPHICA L SUFIS M
And he expresse d the view that:
What is intended with manlines s (virtue) is the
action of a free man,
be it a man connecte d with the mosque or with the
church.
(SD 1097 )
In the course of time this view gained acceptanc e among the Sufis.
For as the Sufis gained more knowledg e of God (or though t they
had), thei r religiou s prejudice s diminished , and they understoo d
that "the ways to God are as many as the breaths of men." They
knew tha t he who enters the flaming ocean of love is no longer
capable o f discernin g Islam from unbelie f (MT 222). Nevertheless ,
they woul d formall y cling to their own religion as the last and most
comprehensive revelatio n of divine truth, and even though some
of them might allegoriz e the rites of Islam, they did not abolish
them.
Although Sufism , and especiall y the theories of wahdat al-wujud,
has certainl y contribute d to a blurring of borders betwee n the
external religiou s forms, the images that juxtapos e the sheikh and
the brahmin,  the Kaaba and the idol temple as contrastin g mani-
festations o f the one true reality soon became fossilized , and one
should no t draw far-reachin g consequence s from their constan t use
in poetry . These images express the predominanc e of love over law,
of the spirit over the letter, but they were used even by the most
law-bound poet s to flavor their verses. One has to distinguis h care-
fully betwee n poetic languag e and metaphysica l systems.

--- Page 310 ---
7. THE ROSE
and the NIGHTINGALE:
Persian and  Turkish
Mystical Poetry
IMMORTAL ROS E
One of the question s that has been discusse d frequentl y
in connectio n with Persian lyrical poetry is whether this literatur e
should be interprete d as mystical or as erotic. 1 The defender s of
i. Every history of Persian, Turkish , and Pakistan i literatur e contain s informatio n
about Suf i poetry. The student should consult these books to get acquainte d with the
different viewpoint s of Western authors concernin g the phenomeno n of mystica l love
and the influenc e of Sufi though t on the developmen t of poetry. The followin g are
particularly important : Herman n Ethe, "Neupersisch e Literatur, " in Grundriss  der
Iranischen Philologie,  ed. Wilhelm Geiger and Ernst Kuhn (Strasbourg , 1895-1901) ,
gives an excellen t survey of the historica l developmen t and the genres. Edward G.
Browne, A  Literary History of Persia, 4 vols. (1902; reprint ed., Cambridge , 1957), is a
valuable introductio n to the problems , with many fine translation s from classica l
poetry. A . J. Arberry , Classical  Persian Literature  (London , 1958), contains a useful
introduction. Ja n Rypka , History of Iranian Literature  (Dordrecht , 1968), is very in-
formative, wit h exhaustiv e notes and an extensiv e bibliography , includin g Tajik and
Indo-Persian literatures , unfortunatel y withou t examples . Antoni o Pagliar o and
Alessandro Bausani , Storia della letteratura  persiana  (Milan, 1960), is, like Bausani' s
Persia Religiosa  (Milan, 1959), very thought-provokin g and contain s interestin g re-
marks abou t poetical techniqu e and imagery . Elias John Wilkinso n Gibb, A History
of Ottoman  Poetry, 6 vols. (1901-1909 ; reprint ed., London , 1958-63) , gives an ex-
cellent introductio n to the problem s of mystical poetry and its roots.
287

--- Page 311 ---
288 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
the purely mystica l meaning of Hafiz's ghazals are as vehemen t in
their claim s as those who find in his poetry only sensual love,
earthly intoxicatio n by "the daughte r of the grape," and sheer
hedonism. Ye t both claims are equally wide of the mark.
It is typical of Persian lyrics that certain religiou s ideas that
form the center of Islamic theology , certain images taken fro m the
Koran an d the Propheti c tradition , or whole sentence s from the
Holy Wri t or the hadlth can turn into symbols of a purely aesthetic
character. Thu s poetry provide s almost unlimite d possibilitie s for
creating ne w relation s between worldly and otherworldl y images,
between religiou s and profane ideas; the talented poet may reach
a perfect interplay of both levels and make even the most profane
poem bea r a distinct "religious " flavor. The profanatio n of certain
Koranic word s may often shock the Western reader, but it opens
surprising ne w vistas. There is scarcely a verse in the poetry of the
greatest master s of Persian, Turkish , and Urdu poetry that does
not reflect , in some way, the religiou s backgroun d of Islamic cul-
ture; it is like the pools in the courtyard s of the mosques , in which
the grandeu r of the huge building is mirrored , its beauty enhance d
by the strange effects of tiny waves or of verdure springin g forth
from the shallow water.
It seems futile, therefore , to look for either a purely mystica l or
a purely profane interpretatio n of the poems of Hafiz, Jaml, or
clraql—their ambiguit y is intended , the oscillatio n betwee n the
two level s of being is consciousl y maintaine d (sometime s even a
third leve l may be added), and the texture and flavor of the mean-
ing of a word may change at any moment , much as the color of the
tiles in a Persian mosque varies in depth accordin g to the hour of
the day. One cannot derive a mystical system out of Persian or
Turkish poetr y or see in it an expressio n of experience s to be taken
at face value. The opalescenc e of Persian poetry has caused much
misunderstanding i n the West, for no translatio n can reflect the
closely interwoven , glitterin g symbolis m that lies behind each
word of a hemistich or a verse.
Persian lyric s would never have acquire d their peculiar charm
without th e Sufi theories ; these are the backgroun d upon which
this poetr y develops , and the tension between the worldly and the
religious interpretatio n of life is resolved , in the poems of the
outstanding master s of this art, in a perfect harmony of the spiritual ,
psychic, an d sensual components . Confronte d with the suprem e

--- Page 312 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 289
beauty in his love experiences , the poet was able to create works
of art that reflect this glory in small, lucid, prismati c fragments ,
which, take n together , may be able to convey an idea of the original
brightness o f this glorious beauty.
Rose and mirror and sun and moon—wha t are they?
Wherever w e looked, there was always Thy face, 2
says the Urdu poet Mir in the late eighteent h century , to cite
but one of the hundred s of poets who realized this ineffable experi-
ence of love in its fullness and tried to sing of it in the imagery of
roses and nightingales .
The phenomeno n of mystica l love that underlie s this develop -
ment is one of the most fascinatin g aspects of Sufism: a transcenden t
and absolut e object is made the goal of every thought and feeling,
so that love gains absolute primacy in the soul and mind of the
lover. The spiritua l life becomes so highly intensified , so delicatel y
differentiated, tha t it almost develop s into an art of its own. The
expression o f these subtle and basicall y ineffable feelings of mystical
love form s the content of some of the finest books on love ever
written in the Persian language . Sometime s such a refined and
deepened lov e would find its object in a human being, in which the
fullness o f divine beauty and radiant glory seemed to be reflected ,
and out of this attitude the hybrid Persian mystical-eroti c poetry
developed.
Such speculation s seem to take us far away from the love mysti-
cism advocate d by the early Sufis, who would never have accepted
a human medium for the feeling of love, but concentrate d ex-
clusively upo n divine love. They were aware that the inclusio n
of a human object of love could lead to consequence s that were
more than objectionabl e and that threatene d to pollute purity of
feeling (B 347). It is well known that the compan y of the "un-
bearded" youn g men constitute d a danger for the mystics—livin g
as they did in a society in which the feminin e element was largely
excluded fro m communa l life, they directed their admiratio n to
young boys , disciples , or foreigners , and the books from the Abbasid
period aboun d with love stories of this kind. The handsom e boy
of fourteen , "radiant like the full moon," soon became the ideal
of human beauty and as such is often praised in later Persian and
Turkish poetry . That many Sufis could not keep their feeling in
2. Dr. Syed Abdullah , Naqd-i Mir (Lahore, 1958), p. 117.

--- Page 313 ---
2QO / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
check is understoo d from the complaint s about such tendencie s in
Sufi circles . Kharraz—a t the end of the ninth century—eve n had a
dream abou t Satan joyfully boastin g that he had at least one noose
to ensnar e the Sufis, namely their "love for the unbearded " (Q
g).3 This feeling of danger is by no means unique to Kharraz . Huj-
wiri devote d a weighty paragrap h to the practic e of nazar ila3
l-ahddth, th e "looking toward the young men":
Looking a t youth and associatin g with them are forbidde n practice s
and anyon e who declares this to be allowabl e is an unbeliever . The traa-
ditions brough t forward in this matter are vain and foolish. I have seen
ignorant person s who suspecte d the Sufis of the crime in question and re-
garded the m with abhorrence , and I observed that some have made it
a religiou s rule. All the Sufi shaykhs,  however , have recognize d the
wickedness o f such practices , which the adherent s of incarnatio n (hulull-
yat)— may God curse them!—hav e left as a stigma on the saints of God
and the aspirant s to Sufism. (H 549)
The tradition s to which Hujwir i refers here claim that Muham -
mad had seen his Lord "in the most beautifu l form" and that he
beheld Gabrie l in the form of Dahya al-Kalbi , a handsom e young
man from Mecca . Anothe r tradition , accordin g to which three
things are pleasan t to look at—verdure , a beautifu l face, and run-
ning water—doe s not go beyond the limits of a perfectly normal
admiration o f beauty; but the alleged hadith in which Muhamma d
attests, "I saw my Lord in the shape of a beautifu l young man, with
his cap awry," was suspect in orthodo x circles. Nevertheless , it was
this very hadith that so strongly impresse d Persian poets: the ex-
pression kaf-kuldh,  "with his cap awry," is found in poetic descrip -
tion of, or addresse s to, the beloved as early as cAttar's lyric s (AD
26) and is commonplac e with later poets of Iran and India. Nazar,
"looking," becomes , then, one of the central topics of mystica l love
experience. Th e mystic who is completel y absorbe d in his love
contemplates i n the human beloved only the perfect manifestatio n
of divine beauty, which is as distant from him as God Himself .
Gisudaraz says :
You look at the beautifu l one and see figure and stature—
I do not see anythin g between save the beauty and art of
the creator. 4
3. For this phenomeno n see Adam Mez, Die Renaissance  des Islam (Heidelberg ,
1922), pp. 275, 337; Hellmut Ritter, Das Meer der Seele. Gott, Welt und Mensch  in den
Geschichten Farlduddin  cAttdrs (Leiden , 1955), pp. 459 ff., about the problem of
nazar and "love of the unbearded. "
4. Muhamma d Gisudaraz , Diwan anis al-^ushshdq  (n.p., n.d.), p. 67.

--- Page 314 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 2Q1
Although Go d has no likeness and none like him (mithl),  He has
a mithdl, "image," in this world, as LahijI writes in his much-rea d
commentary o n Shabistari' s Gulshan-i  rdz (CL 178).
The term shdhid,  "witness, " is used for the beautifu l beloved ,
for he is the true witness of divine beauty (R 549). To look at him,
to adore hi m from a distance, may induce the Sufi to truly religiou s
ecstasy, an d to contemplat e his face is worship. Whereve r beauty is
revealed, ther e out of necessity love must grow. Beauty and love
are interdependent , and many Persian , Turkish , and Urdu ro-
mances dea l with the eternal story of husn u cishq, "beaut y and
love." As a late Indo-Persia n poet has put it:
Wherever ther e is an idol,
a Brahmi n was created.
(AP 258)
The belove d is usually called an "idol" in Persian poetry, worthy
of worship , a sensual image of the divine, which is hidden by its
very brightness . Beauty would be meaningles s if there were no love
to contemplat e it—we may think, once more, of the concept of God
as the hidden treasur e who wanted to be known: the treasure of
beauty (fo r "God is beautifu l and loves beauty" ) reveals itself in
order to kindle love in the human heart.
The great masters of love mysticism , like Ahmad Ghazzali , Jalal-
uddln Ruml , and Fakhruddi n clraql, hav e regarded this worldly
love as a pedagogica l experience , a training in obedienc e toward
God, since the human beloved , like God, has to be obeyed absolute -
ly. "Whe n the soul is educated by human love and has become
firm-footed i n the innermos t secret of love, and the heart is polished
by the fire of love from the satanic and base insinuations , then the
'soul whic h command s evil' becomes 'peaceful ' beneath the strokes
of the violent wrath of love" (BA 203), says Baqli in his book on
love. Rum i compare s it to the "woode n sword that the hero gives
his child" (D 27) so that the child may learn the techniqu e of
fighting.
Lover an d beloved are unthinkabl e withou t each other—th e
lover's action s consist completel y of niydz, "asking and petitioning, "
whereas the  beloved is made of perfect ndz, "coquetry" ; beyond
this contras t lies the unity in love. Beauty, though basicall y a static
concept, ha s no full meanin g withou t admiratio n and love, and
the belove d needs the lover for his own perfection . The story of

--- Page 315 ---
2Q2 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Mahmud an d Ayaz is a typical expressio n of this kind of love and
shows, at the same time, how the poets of Iran used historica l facts
to point out eternal truth. Mahmud of Ghazna, the warrior king of
Afghanistan (d . 1030), famous in politica l history as the conquero r
of northwes t India, becomes in literary tradition the model of the
lover, becaus e of his inclinatio n toward his slave Ayaz. 5 The com-
plete surrende r of the Turkish officer Ayaz, for whom only Mahmu d
exists, result s in perfect love of the king, who becomes , in a won-
derful transformation , the slave of his slave. Ayaz is the symbol of
the lovin g soul. One day the Huma bird passed over Mahmud' s
army, and everybod y rushed to be touched by the Huma's shade,
which, in Persian tradition , conveys kingdom . Only Ayaz went
into Mahmud' s shade (U 176), for here was his true kingdom : he
is like the faithful, who does not seek glory and power from any-
thing create d but only from his eternall y rich, beloved Lord. 6
The other model of mystical love is Majnun , the hero of the old
Arabic tale , who lost his senses in his love of Laila. This woman,
who was not even particularl y beautiful , was for him the paragon
of beauty , and thus, as interprete d by the Sufi poets, became the
manifestation o f divine beauty seen through the eyes of love.
It is in this world of intense spiritua l passion that Persian poetry
grew. Whe n Ruzbiha n Baqll holds that the love of a human being
is the ladder toward the love of the Mercifu l (BA 183; B 571), he
alludes to the classica l Arabic saying that the metapho r is the
bridge towar d reality—hence , human love is generall y called, in
the Persia n tradition , cishq-i majdzl,  "metaphorica l love." Jam!
sums it up this way: "Beholdin g in many souls the traits of Divine
beauty, an d separatin g in each soul that which it has contracte d in
the world , the lover ascends to the highest beauty, to the love and
knowledge o f the Divinity , by steps of this ladder of created souls." 7
The unsurpassabl e master of love and passion in the highest
sense was, no doubt, Jalaluddi n Rurm, whose work will be discusse d
5. See Gertrud Spies, Mahmud  von Ghazna  bei Farld ud^dtn  cAttdr (Basel , 1959);
several epic s have been devoted to this topic, and lyrics abound in allusion s to Ayaz.
6. Anothe r typical exampl e of this kind of mystical love is Hilali's Shah u gadd; see
Hermann Ethe , Konig und Derwisch,  Romantisch-mystisches  Epos vom Scheich  Hilali,
dem persischen  Original treu nachgebildet  (Leipzig, 1870). This poem was criticize d by
the Mogu l empero r Babur, who found it highly immoral . Anothe r expressio n of
mystical surrende r is cArifi, "Gu u jaugdn," The Ball and the Polo-Stick,  or Book o]
Exstasy, ed . and trans. Robert Scott Greenshield s (London , 1932).
7. Reynol d A. Nicholson , The Mystics  of Islam (1914; reprint ed., Chester Springs ,
Pa., 1962) , p. no.

--- Page 316 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE /
later. For him, as for many of his predecessor s and followers , love
was the power innate in everything , working through everythin g
and directin g all things toward unification . Avicenn a has expresse d
ideas of this kind in his Risdla f?l-cishq, and poets like the romanti c
NizamI ha d describe d the magneti c force of this love:
If the magnet were not loving, how could it attract the
iron with such longing?
And if love were not there , the straw would not seek
the amber .
In the great hymn on love in Khosrau  Shlrm, to which these lines
belong, Nizam I claims that "the heaven has no mihrdb save love."
This cosmologica l role of love was emphasize d by Rumi: love is,
for him, like an ocean on which the skies are only foam, agitated
like Zulaykh a in her love for Joseph; the whirling movemen t of
the skies is the result of the wave of love—if there were no love,
the world would be frozen (M 5:3854-58) .
If this heaven were not in love, then its breast would
have no purity,
and if the sun were not in love, in his beauty would be
no light,
and if earth and mountai n were not lovers, grass would
not grow out of their breast.
(D 2674)
It is only for the sake of the lovers that the sky revolves and the
spheres turn , not for the sake of the baker and the blacksmith , nor
for the sake of the magistrat e and pharmacis t (D 1158).
More tha n any other poet, Rumi stresses the dynami c characte r
of love—i t makes the ocean boil like a kettle (M 5:2735) , as he says
repeatedly, an d it is the power that changes everythin g for the
better, purifyin g it and quickenin g it:
From love bitternes s became sweet, from love copper
became gold ,
from love the dregs became pure, from love the pains
became medicine ,
from love the dead become alive, from love the king is
made a slave.
(M 2:1529-31 )293

--- Page 317 ---
294 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
For love turns the dead matter of bread into soul and then makes
the perishabl e soul eternal (M 5:2014) . It is poison, but :
Sweeter tha n this poison I did not see any drink,
Lovelier tha n this illness I did not see any health.
(M 6:4599 )
Love is fire, it burns everything . First of all it burns the station of
patience: "M y patience died the night that love was born" (M
6:4161). An d the poor lover is in the hand of love "like the cat in
the bag, one moment high, one moment low" (M 6:908).
Carried awa y by this love that manifest s God's beauty as well as
His majesty—sinc e it is fascinatin g and frightening , killing and
reviving a t the same time—th e mystics have seen love as "a flame
that burn s everythin g save the Beloved " (N 408). The classica l
definition o f love that leads to true tauhld, extinguishin g and con-
suming everythin g that is other than God, is expresse d here in
poetical languag e that was taken over by almost all the Muslim
poets writin g in Persian , Turkish , or Urdu. The fire symbolis m
that abound s in the work of a nineteenth-centur y Urdu poet like
Ghalib ha s its roots in this concept of absolute love.
Only out of such experience s can the fascinatin g works of some
of the early Persian mystics be understood. 8 Three of them have
gained popularit y primaril y because of their love theories and
their subtl e interpretatio n of the mystica l states; they are Ahmad
Ghazzali (d . 1126), his disciple cAynuDl-Qudat Hamadhan i (execute d
1132), and Ruzbiha n Baqli of Shiraz (d. 1209).
There is little doubt that Abu Hamid al-Ghazza.li , the great
reviver of religious sciences , appealed to the average Muslim and
is largely responsibl e for forming the moderatel y mystica l outlook
of Islamic society in the later Middle Ages, but neither in depth of
experience no r in beauty of languag e can he compet e with his
younger brothe r Ahmad . In fact, the "Muslim intellectual " Abu
Hamid is reported to have acknowledge d his brother' s superiorit y
in the path of love. Ahmad Ghazzal i was a successfu l preache r and
director o f souls with a number of disciples , who carried on his
teachings; som e member s of his mystical lineage became importan t
representatives o f Sufi orders. The orthodox—shocke d by his views
8. The best introductio n to this literatur e is given by Hellmu t Ritter, "Philologik a
VII: Arabisch e und persisch e Schriften iiber die profane und die mystisch e Liebe,"
Der Islam  21 (1933).

--- Page 318 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE /
about the justificatio n of Satan and his love theories—dislike d him
thoroughly, an d even one of his own colleague s could not help
calling hi m "one of the marvels of God in lying, gaining access to
worldly possessio n through his preaching." 9
Ahmad compose d a number of mystica l treatises , among them
one abou t the problem of samcf; but even if he had written only
the small treatise called Sawdnih,  "Aphorism s on Love," it would
have been enough to establis h him as one of the greatest mystics in
the Musli m world. 10 In those short paragraphs , intersperse d with
verses, we recogniz e him as the master of chaste love, who puts
between himsel f and the beautifu l beloved a rose, contemplatin g
now the rose, now the beloved . The Sawdnih  are written in a Persian
style that looks, at first glance, simple and unassuming ; but the
language ha s reached such a degree of refinement , the words and
the sentence s are so fragile, that any attempt to render them into a
Western languag e and keep their flavor intact would be futile.
The autho r speaks of the mystery of the mutual relationshi p be-
tween love r and beloved , who are like mirrors to each other, lost
in contemplating eac h other, one being "more he than he." Ahmad
touches th e secret of suffering in love, of hope in hopelessness , of
inexplicable grace . The eternal theme of the interactio n of love
and beaut y forms the continuu m beneat h the delicate melodie s
of this booklet, which should be read aloud to enjoy its softly swing-
ing rhythm . Its words about lover, beloved , and love need to be
meditated upo n again and again; each time one reads them, they
disclose a  new aspect, as if veils were taken off the meanin g and
again replace d by new veils of different color.
It is in the spiritua l chain of Ahmad Ghazzal i that a hadlth qudsl
was transmitte d that tells how God answere d the questio n of a
Sufi who asked Him the meanin g and wisdom of creation : "The
wisdom o f My creating you is to see My vision in the mirror of
your spirit , and My love in your heart" (N 370) .
The Sawdnih  inspired one of the works of Ahmad Ghazzali' s
beloved disciple , cAynuDl-Qudat Hamadhani , the Tamhlddt. 11 This
book—in spit e of its delicate language , more accessibl e than the
9. Merlin S. Swartz, Ibn al-Jauzi's  "kitdb al-qussds  wa^l-mudhakkirln"  (Beirut ,
1971), # 221.
10. Ahma d Ghazzall , Sawdnih.  Aphorismen  iiber die Liebe, ed. Hellmu t Ritter (Is-
tanbul, 1942) .
11. cAynu3l-Qudat Hamadhani , LawfPih,  ed. Rahim Farmanis h (Tehran , 1337 sh.
/1958); cAynu'l-Quda t Hamadhani , Ahwdl u dthar, ed. cAfif cUsayran (Tehran , 1338
sh./i959).295

--- Page 319 ---
2g6 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Sawdnih—has ofte n been copied. <:Aynu:'l-Qudat's talen t for explain-
ing even the deepest and most serious thoughts in poetical language
was greate r than his master's . Because it was easy to understand ,
therefore, th e Tamhldat  was widely read in the Musli m world; it was
one of the favorite books of the Delhi Chishtl mystics in the late
thirteenth century . The south Indian Chishtl saint Gisudara z wrote
a commentar y on it about 1400, and later a saint of Bijapur, Miran
Husain Sha h (d. 1669), translate d the book into Dakhni Urdu, an
idiom tha t was just beginnin g to emerge as a literary language .
Like his master, cAynu3l-Qudat wa s consume d by burning divine
passion. Jam ! said about him: "Only few people made such dis-
closures o f realities and explanation s of subtle points as he did,
and miracle s like killing and revivin g became manifes t in him"
(N 414-15) . The talente d young man was, however , imprisone d
in Baghda d for some alleged heresy and execute d in 1132 in the
bloom of youth. His apology , written in Arabic like some of his
other works , proves tha t he did not feel at all guilty of the heresies
that the orthodo x claimed to have discovere d in his very persona l
interpretation o f Sufism. Rather, he felt that he was in perfect
agreement wit h the tenets of Islam. 12 We may suspect, therefore ,
that a matter of persona l envy or revenge precipitate d his prema-
ture death .
The third name in the chain of the great love mystics of Iran is
that of Ruzbiha n Baqll, who died at an advance d age in 1209
in his hometow n of Shiraz.
That elde r of Shiraz, famed Ruzbihan ,
whose lik e in all the earth was never seen
for purity and truth, the bezel was
bejewelling th e ring of saints, a man
learned in spirit, life of all the world;
of lovers all and gnostics he was king,
captain of every heart that hath attained
his spirit gladdenin g beauty. 13
That is how clraqi, anothe r of the great lovers in the history of
Sufism, describe d him poetically .
12. A. J. Arberry , A Sufi Martyr (London , 1969), a translatio n of cAynuDl-Qudat's
apology. Se e Fritz Meier's review in Der Islam 49, no. i (1972).
13. Fakhruddi n clraqi, The Song of the Lovers,  ed. and trans. A. J. Arberry (Oxford ,
1939). P- 57-

--- Page 320 ---
THE ROS E AND THE NIGHTINGAL E / 2Q7
Ruzbihan's numerou s works are not only an importan t source
for mystica l love theories ; his Sharh-i  shathiydt  gives us a key to
the understandin g of the theopathi c utterance s of early mystics .
These paradoxes , which have always been a stumblin g block for
the orthodo x and even for moderat e Sufis, in many cases defy ratio-
nal explanatio n and can only be understoo d by reachin g the same
state as the mystic who uttered them. Baqli's main concern is the
writings an d sayings of Hallaj, which makes the Sharh indispensabl e
for an understandin g of Hallaj's work. In this area Ruzbihan' s
interpretations ar e unquestionabl y correct , for the Shirazi Sufis
had generall y been favorabl e to the martyr-mysti c of Baghdad ; Ibn
Khafif of Shiraz (d. 982) had been one of the few admirer s of Hallaj
who remaine d faithful to him until his death, and Ruzbiha n saw
himself in this tradition. 14
Overwhelmed b y love and longing , Baqli laments over the lost
greatness o f Sufism and, calling upon the differen t cosmic powers,
cries out (enumeratin g the masters of the Path before he reaches
the praise of him to whom every mystica l chain goes back—of Ahmad
al-Hashimi, i.e. , the Prophe t Muhammad) :
O Time that cause s misfortune ! Where is the outcry of
Shibli? Wher e is HUSH'S calling?
O Epoch [or: afternoon ] of the world! Where is Abu3!-
Hasan Nuri' s singing? Where Abu Hamza-y i
Sufi's Ah?
O shadow of the skies! Where is Sumnun' s age and
DhuDn-Nun's lov e and Sumnun' s sigh and Buhlul' s
complaints?
O carpet of the earth! Where is Junayd's steadfastnes s
and Ruwaym' s mystica l concert?
O limpid green water! Where are the melodie s of
Subbuhi an d the handclappin g of Abu cAmr Zujjaji ?
And the dance of AbuDl-Husayn Sirwani ?
14. Ruzbiha n Baqll, "'Abhar  al-'ashiqm,"  Le jasmin des fideles d'amour,  ed. Henry
Corbin (Tehra n and Paris, 1958); Ruzbiha n Baqll, "Sharh-i  shathiydt,"  Les paradoxes  des
Soufis, ed . Henry Corbin (Tehra n and Paris, 1966). Louis Massignon , "La vie et les
oeuvres d e Ruzbeha n Baqll," in Studia Orientalia  loanni Pedersen  dicata septuagenario
(Copenhagen, 1953) , is the first biograph y of this fascinatin g mystic . Henry Corbin ,
"Quietude e t inquietud e de 1'ame dans le soufism e de Ruzbiha n Baqli de Shiraz, "
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 7 (1948); Corbin, "Sympathie  et theopathi e chez les fideles d'amou r
en Islam, " Eranos-Jahrbuch  24 (1955).

--- Page 321 ---
208 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
O light of the sun! Where is the breath of Kattani , and
the ferven t passion of Nasrabadhi ?
O sphere of Saturn! Where is the realm of Bayezid
Bistami's tauhid?
O crescen t of the sky! Where is Wasiti's unrest, and
Yusuf ibn Husain' s elegance ?
O drops of the cloud in the air! Where are the meaning s
of Abu Mazahim- i Shirazi? Where is the changin g
color of Jacfar-i Hadda ?
O color of Saturn, o shame of Venus, o letter of intelli-
gence! Wher e is the bloodshe d of Husayn ibn Mansu r
in "I am the Truth"?
Where is the struttin g of the strange scholar in unfami -
liar fetter s in the place of executio n in the midst of
friends an d enemies ?
O Time and Space! Why are you withou t the beauty of
Sheikh 'Abdulla h ibn Khafif?
(B 377-78 )
What so profoundl y impresse s the reader in Ruzbihan' s writings ,
both in his commentar y on the Shathiydt  and his cAbhar al-^ashiqm
—"Le Jasmin  des fideles d'amour"  as Henry Corbin translate s its
title—is hi s style, which is at times as hard to translat e as that of
Ahmad Ghazzal i and possesse s a stronger and deeper instrumenta -
tion. It is no longer the scholasti c languag e of the early exponent s
of Sufism , who tried to classify stages and stations , though Baqli
surely kne w these theories and the technica l terms. It is the lan-
guage refine d by the poets of Iran during the elevent h and twelfth
centuries, fille d with roses and nightingales , pliable and colorful .
Who else would describ e love in such words: "Look well, for the
heart is the marketplac e of His love, and there the rose of Adam on
the branc h of Love is from the color of manifestatio n [tajalli]  of
His Rose. When the nightingal e 'spirit' becomes intoxicate d by this
rose, he will hear with the ear of the soul the song of the bird of
Alast ['Am I not your Lord?'] in the fountainplac e of preeternity "
(B 396). Or who would invite his beloved , to whom the Jasmin  is
dedicated, t o enter his heart to see the manifestatio n of pure love in
the rose petals of his soul, where thousand s of nightingale s have
burned th e wings of their high ambitio n in the fire of love (BA
47)? Divin e beauty is revealed in human beauty :

--- Page 322 ---
THE ROS E AND THE NIGHTINGAL E / 2Q9
The visio n of the cosmos is the qibla of the ascetics ,
the vision of Adam is the qibla of the lovers.
(BA 79)
Without an y wish or hope of even touchin g the beloved' s skirt, this
love is absolutel y pure: "The antimo n of the eyes of the lovers who
travel in Reality is the dust of the village of the Divine Law" (BA
112).
Ruzbihan find s the proof for this lawboun d and chaste love in
the Koran itself. Did not God say in his revelation : "We tell you
the most beautifu l story"? And this is the story of lover and be-
loved, of Yusuf and Zulaykha , the story of chaste and, therefore ,
lawful lov e as revealed in Sura 12 (BA 19). Thus, he can feel that at
the Day of the Primordia l Covenant , "the soul flew in the world of
Divine lov e with the wings of human love" (BA 4).
It was Ruzbiha n Baqll who highlighte d the propheti c traditio n
according t o which Muhamma d declare d the red rose to be the
manifestation o f God's glory (B 265). He thus gave the rose—love d
by poets throughou t the world—th e sanction of religiou s experi-
ence; his vision of God is a vision of clouds of roses, the divine
presence fulgen t as a marvelou s red rose. Since this flower reveals
divine beaut y and glory most perfectly , the nightingale , symbol of
the longin g soul, is once and foreve r bound to love it—and the
numberless rose s and nightingale s in Persian and Turkish poetry
take on, wittingl y or unwittingly , this metaphysica l connotatio n of
soul-bird an d divine rose.
Ruzbihan become s enrapture d when he speaks of his own ex-
periences, o f his suffering , his yearnin g for beauty. The iltibds,  the
concealment o f preeterna l beauty in created forms, is the theme of
his meditations ; faithful to the classica l Sufi tradition , he sees in
love the effort to break once more through the limits of the created
world in order to reach the state of true tauhld,  as it existed at the
Day of the Covenant . In this experience , the passage from human
love to transcendenta l love and thus to true tauhld is, as Corbin—
following Ruzbihan' s mystica l flights—ha s stated (CV 135), a
metamorphosis o f the subject : the lover, finally, is transforme d into
sheer love and thus reaches the state in which lover and beloved are
one and in which the beloved can speak through the lover (B 57).
More tha n five centurie s later, this transformatio n of the loving
soul into pure love was expresse d in a remote corner of the Islamic

--- Page 323 ---
300 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
world, in Sind, by Shah cAbdu3l-Latif, whos e heroine , lost in the
desert in search of her beloved , cries out her longing . But the poet
understands:
O voice in the desert—a s if the grouse were crying . . .
cry from the water's depths—i t is the sigh of love.
O voice in the desert, like sound of a violin-
It is the song of love—onl y the people unawar e took it
to be a woman's song. 15
This myster y of transformatio n from chaste human love to the
summit o f divine love remain s one of the central themes of great
poetry in Iran and its neighborin g countries , and the lover under-
stands:
Everything i s the beloved , and the lover a veil,
Living is the beloved , and the lover is dead.
(M 1:30)
The ambiguit y of the experienc e of love, as it emerges from these
mystical theorie s and practices , resulted in the use of erotic sym-
bolism by the mystics and of mystica l terms by the profane poets.
The true , pure mystics have sometime s tried to explain the sym-
bolism of earthly love and wine as completel y allegorical—eve n Ibn
cArabI use d this method in his interpretatio n of his own Tarjumdn
al-ashwaq. Thi s trend became even stronge r in later Persian, Turk-
ish, and Urdu poetry, and the mystics drew up whole charts to
explain th e simples t words in a mystical sense. A glance at the list
by Muhsi n Fayd Kasham , a seventeenth-centur y Persian author ,
suffices to  illustrate this tendency :
rukh (face , cheek): the revelatio n of Divine Beauty in Attribute s of
grace, e.g. , the Gracious , the Clement , the Life-giving , the Guide, the
Bountiful, Light , Divine Reality.
zulf (tress) : the revelatio n of Divine Majesty in Attribute s of Omni-
potence, e.g. , the Withholder , the Seizer . . . phenomen a as veil conceal-
ing Divin e Reality .
khardbdt (tavern) : Pure Unity, undifferentiate d and unqualifie d . . . ,16
Other poet s have used even more abstract method s of allegorizing ,
15. Shah cAbduDl-Latif, "Su r Macdhuri," i n Shdha jo risdlo, ed. Kalyan B. Adwani
(Bombay, 1958) , i:lines 21-22.
16. A. J. Arberry , Sufism: An Account  of the Mystics of Islam (London , 1950), pp.
ngff.

--- Page 324 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 301
in which , eventually , the charm of a quatrain is lost in the heavy
chains of a terminolog y stemmin g from Ibn cArabI. It is doubtfu l
whether th e great masters of mystica l love, like Ruzbiha n Baqll,
would hav e appreciate d this exaggerate d "mystical " explanation —
they knew that the word in itself is like a fan, veiling and unveilin g
at the same time.
Persian mystica l poetry, especiall y mystica l didactic poet-
ry, seems to have originate d in the eastern part of Iran. One of its
early center s was Herat, where cAbdullah-i Ansari' s Mundjdt  ush-
ered in a new period of religiou s literatur e in Persian . These short
orisons hav e never been surpassed , in prayer literature , in their
stylistic simplicity , which combine s an easy-flowin g rhythm with
material fo r long meditations . Y. E. Bertels has traced the course of
Sufi didacti c poetry, 17 of which some of Ansari' s books constitut e
a first stage, but which found its first master, half a century later,
in Ansari' s compatrio t Abul-Maj d Majdu d Sanal (d. ii3i). 18
As a court poet of the later Ghaznawid s in Ghazn a itself, Sana 3!
began hi s career with highly elaborat e and skillfu l qastdas.  He
visited severa l places in Khurasan , most importantl y Balkh and
Sarakhs. H e then turned to mystical , or rather ascetic , poetry. Al-
though ther e is a charmin g anecdot e about his repentance , the
true reaso n for this change of attitude is not clear. He says in one
of his ghazals:
First I wrote books with great painstakin g care-
Eventually I  broke my pens in complet e bewilderment .
(SD 801)
Sanaa's majo r work, which laid the foundation s of mystica l
didactic poetry , is a mathnawl,  a poem writte n in rhymin g hemi-
stiches, a  form that was develope d in Iran for epic purpose s and in
which onl y a certain group of rather short meters is applicable .
This book , the Hadlqat  al-haqlqa,  "Orchar d of Truth, " shows
traces of the author' s past as court poet; it is dedicate d to Sultan
17. Y. E. Berthels , "Grundlinie n der Entwicklungsgeschicht e des sufische n Lehrge -
dichtes," Islarnica  3, no. i (1929).
18. Abu Jl-Majd Majdu d Sana 3!, The First Book of the "Hadiqatu^l-Haqlqat"  or the
Enclosed Garden  of the Truth of the Hakim  Sandal of Ghazna,  ed. and trans. Major
John Stephenso n (1908; reprint ed., New York, 1971). For editions of Sanaa's works
see the Bibliography .THE PILGRIMAG E OF THE BIRDS : SANA DI AND CATTAR

--- Page 325 ---
3O2 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Bahramshah, t o whom the entire tenth chapter is devoted. Western
scholars usuall y consider the Hadlqa a rather boring book; in fact,
it lacks the flowing delicacy of many later mystical poems. Written
in a slightly jumping meter, the book is divided into ten chapters ,
most of which deal with differen t aspects of the mystica l and the
practical life . The style is, at times, rather dry; yet the Hadlqa con-
tains a number of famous stories that were known in Sufi circles in
the early twelfth century and may have been adapted partly from
QushayrFs Risdla,  partly from GhazzalF s Ihyc? ^ulum ad-din, both
of which were familiar to the author. The anecdote s of earlier Sufis
and meditation s on mystica l sentence s show which aspects of the
tradition wer e alive during Sanaa's time in the eastern fringe of
the Musli m world.
The reade r eventuall y comes to enjoy the way in which Sana 3!
sets forth his ideas of God and the world, of piety and of false Sufism
in his matter-of-fac t style, not hesitatin g to insert stories and images
of an avowedl y unmystical , sometime s obscene character . The same
can be said of Sanaa's smaller mathnawis,  like the satirical Kdrndma-
yi Balkh,  with its very crude tenor. Some of its expression s have,
however, bee n taken over almost word for word by Sanaa's most
distinguished spiritua l disciple, Jalaludd m Rumi, who came from
Balkh. Medieva l Christia n mystics and theologian s also used very
straightforward an d unrestricte d languag e when explainin g their
ideas or attackin g the enemies of the true religion . On the whole,
Sanaa's imager y is clear and frank (except when he indulge s in
highly rhetorica l devices) ; it is not as elaborat e and oscillatin g as
the languag e of later mystics, but it captures the reader by its sim-
plicity, whic h is well suited to the topics he usually treats. The
Hadlqa ha s become a model for all the later mathnawls  written for
mystical didacti c purposes .
Western orientalist s have admired Sanaa's lyrics much more than
the Hadlqat;  they are fluent, fresh, and sensitive , for the most part,
and for the first time the ghazal form is used for mystical thought.
One of the finest pieces in his Dlwdn is the "Lamen t of Satan," in
which the sober languag e rises to a height not often found in Per-
sian mystica l poetry. Among his qasldas,  the numerou s skillfull y
wrought eulogie s on the Prophe t must be mentioned , along with
the charmin g "Litany of the Birds," in which each bird is assigned
a special way of praising God (SD 30-35).
Among Sanaa' s smaller mathnawls,  the Sayr al-^ibdd ilcfl-ma^ad,

--- Page 326 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 303
"The Journe y of the Servants toward the Place of Return," is highly
revealing. I n it the poet describe s the mystica l theories of the return
of the soul through the different stages of life to its original source-
ideas expresse d by Sanaa's compatrio t Avicenn a a century earlier,
but here brought for the first time into a poem, in which the poet
displays al l his knowledg e of philosoph y and Sufi theories. Reynold
A. Nicholso n and others have considere d this mathnawl  the model
for cAttar's Mantiq  ut-tayr; Nicholso n has even spoken of it as
prefiguring th e theme of the Divine Comedy. 19 It is only one ex-
pression o f the idea of traveling and ascensio n that was so dear to
the Musli m mystic s and that found its most beautifu l poetic ex-
pression i n the works of Faridudd m cAttar.
Out of the ocean like rain clouds come and travel—
for withou t traveling you will never become a pearl!
(AD 707)
Thus says cAttar, wh o is regarded by many scholars as the greatest
of the mathnaw z-writers i n the history of Persian mystica l poetry.
Sana3I wa s the spirit, and cAttar his two eyes—
we have come after Sana 3! and cAttar,
says Jalaluddi n Rumi, acknowledgin g his indebtednes s to the two
great masters . In his work he follows quite closely the patterns estab-
lished by these two mystics of eastern Iran, his own homeland .
While Sana DI was sober and told short, poignant , and sometime s
even bitin g allegories , cAttar, a century later, was a born storyteller .
One can imagine him, sitting in his druggist's shop—a s his surname
cAttar indicates—talkin g to people, curing them, meditatin g upon
mystical subjects , and then writing down his meditation s in his
inimitable style , in beautifu l and clear language .
Fariduddm wa s born in Nishapu r and died there, most likely
in 1220 at an old age. Later mystica l tradition include s him in the
list of the martyrs of love, slain by the orthodo x or, in his case, by
the infidel s because of his excessiv e divine love. Whether he was
indeed kille d by the invadin g Mongol s is uncertain , but the story
indicates th e rank he was given in the spiritual traditio n of Iran.
Both in lyrics and in his numerou s epic works c Attar shows a
fascinating talen t as narrator ; this trait is also evident in his collec-
tion of biographie s of the saints, the Tadhkirat  al-auliya?.  Hagiogra -
19. Reynol d A. Nicholson , A Persian Forerunner  of Dante (Towyn-on-Sea , 1944).

--- Page 327 ---
304 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
phy was, for him, another medium for telling stories about his
venerated masters ; his narrative , and even dramatic , talent is beauti-
fully displaye d in the Tadhkirat.  For factual details, this book
should be supplemente d with other, more sober sources . Many
anecdotes fro m the Tadhkirat  al-auliya 3 have been inserted into
cAttar's poeti c work as well. All his books are, indeed, storehouse s
of anecdote s and of lively tales.
One remarkabl e aspect of his epics is his stern criticism of tempo-
ral rulers. The old Sufi ideals of poverty become , in his work, a
practical device—i s not the dervish much richer and higher than
the king? The king begs everywher e for money; the dervish does
not beg from anybody . Social criticism is often put into the mouth
of a lunatic— cAttar has a whole group of these mentall y derange d
persons, wh o struggle both with God and with the earthly rulers;
an old woman is another instrumen t by which a tyrannica l ruler
is called to reason. The stories about right governmen t are some-
times reminiscen t of similar anecdote s found in the "Mirror s for
Princes," a  literary genre that enjoyed great popularit y in Iran in
the late eleventh century . cAttar doe s not merely tell stories; he
often interpret s them as well without leaving that to the reader.
Hellmut Ritter , who devoted his masterfu l book Das Meer der
Seele to cAttar's mysticis m and poetic art, discerns three stages in
the poet's life.20 In the first period he is the master of storytelling ;
it was in this period that he must have compose d his masterpiece ,
the Mantiq  ut-tayr, "The Birds' Conversation, " his Ildhlndme,
"The Stor y of the King and His Six Sons," and the Muslbatname,
"The Boo k of Affliction. " In the second period the externa l forms
are fadin g away and the anaphora s become longer and longer:
cAttar is often so enrapture d while writing that he tries to describe
the divin e mysterie s in long chains of repeated exclamation s or
identical words ; his intoxicatio n carries him away from logical
reasoning. I t is typical of this period that the hero of the Ushtur-
20. Hellmu t Ritter, Das Meer der Seele, is the comprehensiv e work about cAttar
and, at the same time, about the problem s of Sufi thought and poetry; it is indispens -
able for every serious student . See also Hellmu t Ritter, "Philologik a X," Der Islam
25 (1936) , and "Philologik a XIV-XVI, " Oriens 11-14 (1961), for the philologica l back-
ground. M . Joseph Heliodor e Garcin de Tassy, La poesie philosophique  et religieuse
chez les persons d'apres le "Mantiq ut-tair"  (Paris, 1857-60) ; Fritz Meier, "Der Geist-
mensch be i dem persische n Dichte r cAttar," Eranos-Jahrbuch  13 (1946); Wolfgan g
Lentz, " cAttar als Allegoriker, " Der Islam 35 (1960); A. J. Arberry , Muslim Saints and
Mystics (London , 1960), select translation s from the Tadhkirat  al-auliya 3. For editions
of cAttar's work s see the Bibliography .

--- Page 328 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 305
name—a poe m centerin g around the figure of the puppet player-
commits suicid e in mystica l rapture. The once widely held idea
that cAttar becam e a pious Shiite in the third period of his life can
no longer be maintained ; the works that show a strong Shia inclina-
tion and were once thought to be his can now be ascribed to an-
other poe t by the same name.
cAttar's poems , especiall y the Alantiq  ut-tayr, have become stan-
dard work s of Sufi literature , from which generation s of mystics
and poets have taken their inspiration . His influenc e on related
literature remain s to be discussed . It is sufficien t to mention here
the story of Sheikh Sancan, who fell in love with a Christian maiden
and "change d the rosary for the infidel's girdle" (MT 77 ff.). This
story has found its way even into Kashmir i and Malay literature .
clraqi sings :
Upon this path, for love of a gazelle
the holies t man shrinks not from tending swine. 21
Sancan's nam e occurs in popular Turkish mystica l poetry as often
as in Sindhi Sufi songs. He has become one of the best-know n sym-
bols of true loving surrender , regardles s of religiou s traditions ,
reputation, name , or fame.
One of the most fascinatin g aspects of cAttar's mysticism—a s of
that of his elder contemporar y Ruzbihan—i s his relation to Hallaj.
The spiritua l Hallaj initiated him into the mystica l path. His
biography o f the martyr-mysti c is among the most touching parts
of the Tadhkirat  al-auliya 3 and has shaped the image of Hallaj for
all subsequen t generations . From him cAttar learne d the mysticis m
of suffering , constant pain as remedy:
The pain of love became the medicin e for every heart,
The difficult y could never be solved without love.
(U 346)
More tha n any other mystica l poet of Iran, cAttar can be called
"the voice of pain" (MT 287), the voice of longing and of searching .
His work s treat the perpetua l movemen t of the soul toward its
origin an d goal in differen t allegories . The Muslbatname  is the
story of the Sufi's quest for the absolute : in an objectificatio n of
the experienc e of the forty days' seclusion , the mystic wander s
through th e world of created beings, from the divine spirit down
21. clraql, Son g of the Lovers,  p. 17.

--- Page 329 ---
306 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
to the lowliest of creatures. Th e wayfare r listens to the lisdn ul-hal,
the "tongu e of the state" of wind and earth, of fire and sea, and
hears the endless yearnin g of all creatures , who in a state of con-
fusion lon g for their original home. The experience s that result
from discussion s with the forty created beings are submitted , one
by one, to the Pir, who explains them. Finally, under the guidanc e
of the Prophet Muhammad , the seeker finds his way into the ocean
of his own soul, where all longing ends. But even the union with
the ocean of the soul is not final—whe n the soul has finished its
journey t o God, the journey in God will begin—th e state that the
mystics cal l baqd, subsistenc e in God—an d the soul will traverse
ever new abysses of the fathomles s divine being, of which no tongue
can speak .
cAttar knew—lik e Sana°I and Rumi—tha t this constant movemen t
is not peculiar to the human soul; it goes through the whole created
world (U 63). Endless periods of developmen t are necessar y before
the one beautifu l flower, the one Perfect Man, can come into ex-
istence—periods marke d by the death and annihilatio n of hundred s
of thousand s of lower existences , which, in turn, may one day reach
the state from which their upward movemen t can start (cf. MT
234), for
Everyone's journe y is toward his perfection —
Everyone's proximit y is accordin g to his "state."
(MT 232)
This restlessnes s of creation has been echoed often in later Persian
poetry—among th e post-medieva l poets, Bedil, the Indian mystica l
poet (d. 1721), must be mentioned ; in our time, it was Muhamma d
Iqbal, wh o never tired of describin g the long way of developmen t
from a drop to the ocean, from sperm to man, and eventuall y to the
Perfect Man , the crown and apex of creation .
The moti f of this journey is fully develope d in cAttar's mos t
famous epi c poem, "The Birds' Conversation " (a title alluding to
the Korani c figure of Solomon , representativ e of the mystica l leader
who was able to convers e with the soul birds in a secret tongue).
This epic is the most perfect poetic introductio n to the mystica l
path, with its seven valleys, in which are describe d all the difficultie s
the soul will encounte r on the road. The equatio n soul=bir d is
popular al l over the world. It appeared in many primitiv e religion s
and is still to be found today. In Turkey one still hears the expres-

--- Page 330 ---
THE ROS E AND THE NIGHTINGAL E / 307
sion can kusu uctu, "his soul bird has flown away," when someon e
has died. Persian poetry abound s in this imagery . Avicenn a had
used it, and Ghazzal i wrote a Risdlat at-tayr, a "Birds' Treatise, "
of similar contents . cAttar, however , invented the mystica l end to
the story: the thirty birds who have undertake n the painful journey
in search of the SImurgh , the king of birds, realize finally that they
themselves—being si  murgh, "thirty birds"—ar e the SImurgh . This
is the most ingeniou s pun in Persian literature , expressin g so
marvelously th e experienc e of the identity of the soul with the
divine essence .
The imager y of the birds was elaborate d more and more after
cAttar's Alantiq  ut-layr became one of the favorite story books of
Persian literature. 22 Everyon e who has read Persian poetry, if only
in translation , knows of the nightingal e who yearns for the rose-
it is, in mystica l language , the soul longing for eternal beauty, as
Ruzbihan denne d it. The nightingal e infinitel y repeats the praise
of the rose without tiring, tells of its longing, sings hymns from the
Koran of the rose (i.e., its petals), suffers without complain t the
stings of the thorns. Iqbal has interprete d the song of the nightin -
gale in the context of his philosoph y of unfulfille d union and long-
ing—only longin g gives the soul bird the capacity to sing, inspirin g
it to create lovely melodies . Longing is the highest state the soul
can reach , for it results in creativity , whereas union brings about
silence an d annihilation .
One of the birds describe d in the Mantiq ut-tayr is the falcon,
the white royal bird who longs to return to his master's fist. The
falcon, or white hawk, as beautifull y describe d in cAttar's Ushtur-
ndme, wa s to become one of Rumi's favorite symbols—h e often
spoke of the soul as a falcon, exiled in the compan y of black crows,
or as a nightingal e surrounde d by ravens, or as a gazelle in the
donkey stabl e (M 5:833-38) . And just as cAttar invente d a pun on
the name of the SImurgh , Rumi used a pun on the word falcon,
bdz—the bir d is called by this name because he longs to come back,
bdz, to his sultan's breast. How touchin g is his imagery when he
describes th e noble bird, returnin g at the sound of the falcon's
drum from his earthly exile; he perches on his master's forearm ,
rubbing hi s head on his breast: thus the once lost and bewildere d
soul returns , at peace, to the Lord (D 1353) . Every bird, every ani-
mal, has its place in this wonderfu l cosmos of cAttar and his follow-
22. Annemari e Schimmel , "Rose und Nachtigall, " Numen  5, no. 2 (1968).

--- Page 331 ---
308 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
ers in the mystica l Path. Sana 3! had invente d the Litany of the
Birds. Th e dove constantl y repeats ku ku because it is asking the
way towar d the beloved , repeatin g the questio n ku ku, "Where ,
where?" An d the stork, lak-lak, gets his name from his pious at-
testation, al-mulk  lak, al-amr lak, al-hamd lak, "Thine is the king-
dom, Thin e is the order, Thine is the praise." The duck symbolize s
the human being, half bound to earth, half living in the ocean of
God; and the crow is always connecte d with the ugly winter land-
scape of this worldly existence .
The came l becomes the symbol of the faithful person who ful-
fills, in perfect patience , the orders of his master (M 4:3389) ; even
the unclea n dog can become a model for the Sufi since, keeping
faithful compan y with the Seven Sleepers , he became purified and
sanctified, jus t as the lower soul becomes elevated and purified in
the compan y of saintly people.
One of the finest images in Persian poetry—use d by Khaqani ,
Nizami, an d cAttar in the late twelfth century, and then often by
Rumi and his imitators—i s that of the elephan t who dreamed of
India. Th e elephant , an animal invariabl y connecte d with India,
may be capture d and carried away from his homelan d to foreign
lands, but when he sees his home in a dream, he will break all his
chains and run there. This is a perfect image of the mystic's soul,
which, in the midst of worldly entanglements , is blessed with the
vision of its eternal homelan d and returns to the primordia l Hin-
dustan, fo r "the ass does not dream of Hindusta n at all!" (M
4:3067). A s Kipling expresse d it in his poem "The Captive' s
Dream," th e elephan t thinks:
I will remembe r what I was, I am sick of rope and chain.
I will revisit my lost loves, and playmate s masterless .
Every flowe r in the garden becomes , for the mystic poets of the
late twelft h century , a tongue to praise God; every leaf and petal is
a book in which God's wisdom can be read, if man will only look.
God has put signs on the horizon and in man's soul (Sura 41:53);
man has only to look at them. The lily praises God, silently, with
ten tongues ; the violet sits modestl y in its dark blue Sufi garb, its
head on the "knee of meditation. " Red tulips with their dark scars
in their "hearts" may grow out of the burned hearts of lovers, or
they may remind the mystic of black-hearte d hypocrites . The nar-
cissus looks , with languid eyes, toward the creator or makes the

--- Page 332 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 309
lover thin k of the friend's half-close d eyes, and the purple, curly
hyacinth resemble s the tresses of the beloved .
Behind al l created beauty the mystic sees a witness to the source
of eternal beauty—th e ruby is the heart of the stone, which has been
transformed int o a priceless jewel through patience and sheddin g its
blood;23 th e emerald is powerfu l like the mystica l leader, blinding
the eyes of the serpents or the enemies of faith. The millston e turns
in its restless journey like the Sufi, and the waterwhee l sighs like
the lover who is separate d from his home and his friend. Rain is
God's mercy , which revives the heart that has become lowly as
dust; sun is His glory, to be contemplate d through the multicolore d
prisms of created things. The breeze of His loving-kindnes s makes
the growin g boughs and buds dance, and the storm of His wrath
uproots th e dried-up bushes and trees that lack the sap of love.
The eye of the mystic who is enrapture d in love sees traces of
eternal beaut y everywher e and listens to the mute eloquenc e of
everything created . Whateve r he mentions , his goal is the essence of
the beloved—lik e Zulaykha , who, longing for Joseph's beauty, ap-
plied to him "the name of every thing, from rue-see d to aloes-wood. "
If she piled up a hundred thousan d names—
her meanin g and intentio n was always Joseph.
(M 6:4022-37 )
Persian poetry—fro m its very beginnin g conduciv e to precious ,
gemlike images—wa s the ideal vehicle to express these feelings . The
subtle harmon y and ultimat e equilibriu m betwee n the differen t
spheres of being is best maintaine d in the poetry of Hafiz, whose
verses are the perfect flower of the gardens of Shiraz, transparen t as
the air of that town, and fragran t as rose oil distilled from the cen-
turies-old traditio n of love of the divine revealed in visible forms.
MAULANA JALALUDDIN RUMI.
No mystic of Islam is as well known i n the West as Jalal-
uddm Ruml , called by his follower s Maulana , "our master" (Turk-
ish pronounciatio n Mevlana) , or Maulawi . The order inspired by
him, the Mevlevis , known in the West as the Whirlin g Dervishes ,
early attracte d the interest of Europea n visitors to the Ottoma n
23. Annemari e Schimmel , "The Ruby of the Heart," in Zakir Husain Presentation
Volume, ed . Malik Ram (New Delhi, 1968).

--- Page 333 ---
31O / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Empire, an d the first orientalist s intereste d in Persian literatur e
chose his poetry for translation .
Joseph vo n Hammer-Purgstal l (1774-1856) , the indefatigabl e
translator o f Persian, Turkish , and Arabic literature , dedicate d
many page s to Rumi in his classical Geschichte  der schonen  Rede-
kunste Persiens  (1818). His rather dry translation s from parts of the
Diwdn inspire d his one-tim e disciple Friedric h Riicker t (1788-
1866) to create ghazals in Rumi's style—th e first attempt to adapt the
ghazal for m to German poetry. Riickert' s book (1819) is a collection
of wonderfu l mystical poems; they are free adaptations , yet they
convey mor e of Maulana' s genius than most of the later, more lit-
eral, translation s do. Riickert' s translation s have bee n a major force
in shaping Rumi's image in German literary history—mor e so than
the translation s by Vincenz von Rosenzweig-Schwanna u (1838). It
was throug h Riickert' s book that Hegel became familia r with the
enthusiastic mystica l poet whom he praised in his Encyclopaedic
der philosophischen  Wissenschaften.  A century later—t o mentio n
only one example—Constanti n Brunne r relied partiall y on Rumi
(in Riickert' s translation ) for his philosophica l ideas about the
genius. In 1903 Riickert' s ghazals were even translate d into English
ghazals by the Scottish theologia n William Hastie—a s an antidote to
the cult of Omar Khayyam , as the translato r says. The intense study
of Rumi's work by British orientalists—lik e E. H. Whinfiel d and
James W . Redhouse—culminate d in the magnificen t edition by
Reynold A . Nicholso n of Rumi's Mathnawi,  together with a trans-
lation and commentar y (1925-1940). 24 Both Nicholson , whose Se-
lections from  the "Divdn-i  Shams-i Tabriz" (1898) is still one of the
finest introduction s to Maulana' s work, and A. J. Arberry have
translated man y of Rumi's poems and stories into English. 25 Yet a
24. Maulan a Jalaladd m Rumi , Mathnawi-i  ma^nawl,  ed. and trans. Reynol d A.
Nicholson, 8  vols. (London , 1925-40) . Among other Englis h translation s two should
be mentioned : that of the first volume by James W. Redhous e (London , 1881), and
that by Edwar d Henry Whinfiel d (London , 1857). Georg Rosen, Mesnevi  oder Doppel-
verse de s Scheich  Mevldna  Dschaldlad-Dm  Rumi (1843; rev. ed., Munich , 1913). See
Reynold A . Nicholson , Tales of Mystic Meaning  (London , 1931); A. J. Arberry , Tales
from the Mathnawi  (London , 1961) and More Tales from the Mathnawi  (London ,
1963)-
25. Reynol d A. Nicholson , Selected  Poems from the "Divan-i  Shams-i  Tabriz"
(1898; reprin t ed., Cambridge , 1961), was the first Europea n edition and translatio n of
forty-eight ghazals , with a fine introduction . Reynol d A. Nicholson , Rumi: Poet and
Mystic (London , 1950); A. J. Arberry , The "Rubd'-lydt"  of Jaldluddin  Rumi (London ,
1959); Arberry , Alystical  Poems of Rumi (Chicago , 1968); William Hastie , The Festival
of Spring  from the "Divan"  of Jeldleddin  (Glasgow , 1903); Annemari e Schimmel ,
Dschelaladdin Rumi,  Aus dem Diwan  (Stuttgart , 1964). The 7ooth anniversar y of

--- Page 334 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / gll
truly comprehensiv e study of Rumi in a Western languag e is still
lacking. I t will be difficult to do full justice to his work withou t
making a n extensiv e study of the Persian original s and the large
number o f Persian and Turkish works written about him, as well
as the enormou s amount of material compose d in the Indo-Pakista n
Subcontinent.26
It is probabl y legend that young Jalaluddm—wh o was born in
1207 in the city of Balkh—wa s blessed by Fariduddi n c Attar about
1219, whe n he and his family were wanderin g through Iran after his
father had left Balkh before the advancin g hordes o f Genghis Khan.
Yet the story underline s the spiritual affinity between the two great
masters of mystical poetry: Jalaludd m never failed to acknowledg e
his indebtednes s to both cAttar and Sana 0!. His elegy on Sanaa's
death (D 996)—base d on a line of the Ghaznawi d mystic himself
(DS 1059)—i s one of his most touching poems, and there are a num-
ber of literal allusion s to Sanaa's poetry in Rumi's lyrics and in the
MathnawL
The interes t in theologica l and mystica l problems came naturall y
to Jalaluddm ; his father, Baha°uddi n Walad, was a noted theolo-
gian with mystica l inclinations . The influenc e of his ideas, as set
forth in his Ma'drif, on the formatio n of Jalaluddm' s thought still
remains t o be analyze d in full. After long migrations , the family
eventually reache d Anatolia , where the dynasty of the Rum Sel-
jukids wa s ruling in comparativ e peace. In Larand a (modern Kara-
man) Jalaluddm' s mother died and his first son, Sultan Walad, was
born (1226) . It was in that year that Najmudd m Daya Razi, Ku-
Rumi's deat h in Decembe r 1973 resulted in a remarkabl e output of writing about
him and translation s from his work, particularl y in Turkey . Very useful is Mehmet
Onder's Mevldna  bibliografyasi,  vol. i (Ankara, 1973), which contains the previousl y
published book s and articles about Rumi. The second volume gives a survey of the
manuscripts. A  collection of papers read at the Biruni-Rum i Conferenc e at New York
University i n January 1974 was publishe d under the title Biruni/Rumi,  the Scholar
and the Saint, edited by Peter Chelkowsk i (New York, 1975). Rumi, Licht und
Reigen, Gedichte  aus dem Diwan, trans. Johann Christop h Biirgel (Bern, 1973). A
fine introductio n to the Mathnawl,  and indeed the first one in a Western language , is
Joseph vo n Hammer-Purgstall , Bericht iiber den zu Kairo im Jahre 1835 erschienenen
tiirkischen Kommentar  des Mesnewi  Dschelaleddin  Rumi's (Vienna, 1851-); it also ap-
pears in Zwei Abhandlungen  zur Mystik und Magie des Islam von Josef Hammer-
Purgstall, ed . Annemari e Schimme l (Vienna, 1974).
26. Afzal Iqbal, The Life and Thought  of Rumi (Lahore, ca. 1956); Eva Meyero-
vitch, Mystique  et poesie en Islam, Djalal-ud  Din Rumi et I'ordre des dervishes
tourneurs (Paris , 1972). An extensiv e study of Rumi's poetry and though t in English
by the present author is in preparatio n (to be publishe d in the Persian Heritag e Series,
Abaris Books , New York).

--- Page 335 ---
312 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
bra's disciple , finished his Mirsdd ul-^ibdd  in Sivas, in the norther n
province o f the Rum-Seljuki d kingdom ; in later years, he met
Jalaluddm a s well as Sadrudd m Qonaw i in the capital (N 435).
BahaDuddIn Wala d was called to Konya in 1228. There Sultan
cAlaDuddm Kaykoba d had just built the magnificen t mosque in the
center of the town. Numerou s smaller mosque s and madrasas  sur-
rounded th e castle; two of them, built during Rumi's lifetime , are
still standing : the Ince Minarel i (1258) and the Karata y Medres e
(1251). Th e exquisit e turquoise blu e tile work of the dome of this
rather smal l buildin g is a perfect illustratio n of Rumi's poetry: Out
of the four times five "Turkis h triangles"—whic h bear in square d
Kufi the names of the Prophe t and the four righteou s caliphs, as well
as those of other prophets—rise s the tambour , decorate d with Koran-
ic verses in sophisticate d plaited Kufi script. The dome itself is cov-
ered with intricatel y interlace d stars in turquoise , blue, black, and
white tiles , each of them separat e and yet all interwove n in an al-
most inexplicabl e way. The top of the dome is open, so that the sky,
and at night the stars, are reflecte d in the little pool in the center of
the madrasa.
In Rumi' s time scholars , artists, and mystic s from all over the
eastern Islami c world sought shelter in Konya , one of the few safe
places durin g this period when the Mongo l onslaugh t devastate d
large part s of the Muslim world. The intellectua l and religiou s life
of Konya was, therefore , intensel y stimulating . Persian continue d to
be used as a literary language , but the populatio n spoke partly
Greek—there bein g a strong Christia n substratu m in the former city
of Iconium—an d partly Turkish . Rumi used both language s in some
of his verses.
Baha°uddin Walad die d after a few years of teaching , and his son
Jalaluddm succeede d him in his chair. His interest in mystica l prob-
lems was strengthene d by the instructio n of his father's disciple and
friend Burhanuddi n Muhaqqiq , who introduce d him to the deeper
secrets of mystica l thought . Burhanuddi n left Konya about 1240 and
is buried in Kaisari , where his modest tomb is still venerated . Jalal-
uddm probabl y went once, or perhap s twice, to Syria in search of
knowledge an d wisdom—unles s his relation s with the Syrian mystics
go back to his earlier stay in that country . In Damascus , he may have
met Ibn cArabi, wh o died there in 1240. Even if he had no persona l
relationship wit h the great theosophist , Ibn cArabi's foremos t com-
mentator Sadrudd m Qonaw i lived in Konya and was connecte d

--- Page 336 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 313
with Rum i "by special friendshi p and acquaintance " (N 55), though
Jalaluddin wa s not fond of theosophica l speculations . He may also
have met Shamsudd m Tabriz ! in Syria for the first time, but we do
not know anythin g about their relations .
The source s describe Shams as an overpowerin g person of strange
behavior wh o shocked people by his remarks and his harsh words.
He claime d that he had reached the station of being the beloved , no
longer the lover. The favorite story told about him describe s his
meeting wit h Auhadudd m Kirmani , one of those mystica l poets
who contemplate d absolut e beauty in limited forms. He told
Shams: "  'I see the moon in a vessel filled with water.' Shams re-
buked him with the words: 'If you have no boil on your neck, why
don't you look at it in the sky?' " (N 59), thus ridiculin g him for
"looking a t the unbearded. " This dervish, whose spiritual affiliatio n
is as unknow n as his family, was to become the decisive influenc e
in Jalaluddm' s life. At the end of October 1244, he met Shams in
the streets of Konya, and it was this strange, demandin g mystic who
kindled i n him the fire of mystica l love—tha t love describe d by
mystics lik e Ahmad Ghazzali , cAynuDl-Qudat, an d Ruzbiha n Baqli
—an absolut e love that completel y enrapture d him, causing him to
neglect hi s family and his disciples for months at a time. At last they
rebelled an d demande d that Shams leave town. He left indeed, but
after a while he was brought back from Syria by Sultan Walad, for
Rumi foun d separatio n unbearable .
We have a descriptio n of their meeting after Shamsuddm' s re-
turn: they embrace d each other and fell at each other's feet, "so that
one did not know who was lover and who was beloved. " The inten-
sity of their relationshi p grew once more and became so overwhelm -
ing that some of Ruml's disciples , with the cooperatio n of Rumi's
son cAlaDuddm, "th e pride of professors, " decided to send Shams to
the place from which there is no return. One night they called him
out of Jalaluddm' s house, which was opposite his son's house, and,
after stabbin g him, they threw him into the nearby well. Sultan
Walad trie d to allay his father's fears, telling him that everybod y
was in search of Shams; the chronicles , however , relate that during
his father' s sJeep, he quickly buried Shams's body, which he had
taken out of the well, covering the tomb with a hurriedly prepare d
plaster. Thi s very tomb was discovere d a few years ago by the then
director o f the Mevlan a Miizesi, Mehmet Onder; it is located be-
neath the memoria l erected for Shams some time after the event.

--- Page 337 ---
314 /  THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGAL E
As the sun moving clouds behind him run,
All hearts attend thee, O Tabriz's sun!
(D3io)
In the experienc e of this consumin g love, Rumi became a poet.
He who had searched for Shams, the "Sun of Truth," in vain out-
side the country eventuall y discovere d that he was united with him
and "foun d him in himself, radiant like the moon," as Sultan Walad
says. The lyrical poetry born out of this experienc e is written from
a feeling of complet e identification ; instead of using his own pen
name, Jalaluddi n used his friend's name as nom de plume at the end
of most of the poems in which he sings of his love, longing, happi-
ness, and despair in verses that have never been surpasse d in their
sincerity. I t was this experienc e that he describe d in a famous pas-
sage of the Mathnawi:
A certain man knocked at his friend's door: his friend
asked: "Wh o is there?"
He answere d "I." "Begone, " said his friend, "tis too soon!
at my table there is no place for the raw.
How shal l the raw be cooked but in the fire of absence?
What else will deliver him from hypocrisy? "
He turned sadly away, and for a whole year the flames
of separatio n consume d him;
Then he came back and again paced to and fro beside the
house of his friend.
He knocke d at the door with a hundred fears and rever-
ence lest any disrespectfu l word might escape from
his lips.
"Who is there?" cried the friend. He answered : "Thou,
O charme r of all hearts."
"Now," sai d the friend, "since thou art I, come in, there
is no room for two I's in this house." (M 1:3056-64 )
Despite hi s poetical exuberanc e and despite his grief and sorrow,
Jalaluddin remaine d a highly esteeme d member of Konya society;
he was on friendly terms with Mu^mudd m Parwane , the minister ,
and his presence was sought by theologians , mystics , and govern-
ment official s alike. Not too long after Shamsuddin' s death, he ex-
perienced anothe r mystica l love relationshi p with Burhanudd m
Muhaqqiq's spiritua l successor , the modest goldsmit h Salahudd m

--- Page 338 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 315
Zarkub, whos e daughte r became Sultan Walad's wife. Eventually ,
Rumi's discipl e Husamudd m Qelebl inspired him to write his
Mathnawl, tha t mystical didactic poem that Jam! called "the Koran
in Pahlavi, " i.e., in the Persian tongue. Jalaluddl n often referred to
the act of inspiratio n through Husamuddm , who had asked the mas-
ter to compose a work that his disciples could read instead of Sanaa's
and cAttar's mystica l epics. Husamudd m was charged with writing
down the verses that would flow from Rumi's lips, whether he was
walking o n the street or even sitting in the bath.
Both Salahuddi n and Husamudd m were, for Jalaluddln , nothing
but reflection s of the same divine beauty and power he had seen in
the person of Shams, and in many cases he addresse s Husamuddi n
in terms that show that he too was considere d a "light of the sun,"
another manifestatio n of the Sun of Tabriz.
When Rum l died, on 17 Decembe r 1273, Husamuddi n succeede d
to the leadershi p of his disciples . But the formatio n of the order of
the Whirlin g Dervishes , the organizatio n of the dancing ritual and
the establishmen t of a true hierarchy , was left to Sultan Walad (d.
1312), Rumi' s son, who took over his office after Husamuddin' s
death in 1284. Sultan Walad's literary legacy—the Mcfdrif and the
three Mathndwis:  Ibtidafname,  "Book of the Beginning, " Intihff-
ndma, "Boo k of the End," and Rabdbndme,  "Book of the Rebec"—
are considere d the only authenti c commentarie s on Rumi's work
and contai n most of the trustworth y informatio n about his life and
teaching—more tha n the numerou s books compose d by pious devo-
tees.27
It seems that Jalaluddm' s position among the mystics in Konya
was uncontested , even if we do not take literally the story that the
great master s of mystical thought and poetry—lik e Sadrudd m Qon-
awl, Fakhruddi n clraqi, Shamsudd m Iki, Sacid Fargham , and others
—gathered afte r his death. Asked about Maulana , Sadrudd m said:
"If Bayezi d and Junayd had lived in this time, they would have
seized his mantle and would have felt indebted to him; he is the
majordomo o f Muhammada n poverty , and we taste it thanks to
him" (N 464).
Rumi's literar y output was great: more than 30,000 verses of lyric
27. See Farldun Ahmad Sipahsalar , Risdla dar ahwdl-i Mauland  Jalaluddln  Rumi,
ed. Sa cid Nafisi (Tehran , 1325 sh./ig46) . Shamsaddl n Ahmad al-Aflaki , Mandqib  al-
Sm/m, ed . Tahsin Yazici, 2 vols. (Ankara , 1959-61) ; this book was translate d into
French, thoug h not fully satisfactorily , by Clemen s Huart as Les saints des derviches
tourneurs (Paris , 1918-22) .

--- Page 339 ---
316 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
poetry, more tha n 26,000 verses in the Mathnawl;  besides his "table
talks," called  Fihi ma fihi, which "substitut e poetic imaginatio n
for logica l argument, " but are not comparabl e to his poetry, 28 a
number o f letters are also extant. 29 Like c Attar, Rumi liked story-
telling, bu t he lacked the sustaine d narratio n that distinguishe s
cAttar's mystica l epics. He often begins a story—eve n in lyrical
poems—and the n is distracte d by an association , by the sound or the
meaning o f one word, which sets him on a completel y differen t
course unti l he admonishe s himself to return to the original story.
The actor s in the Mathnawl,  as well as the symbols and images used
there, hav e an almost protean versatility , and the MathnawI— "the
shop of unity" (M 6:1528)—contain s almost every conceivabl e mys-
tical theor y known in the thirteent h century . It is, however , next to
impossible t o build up a mystical system from its tales and parables ;
every interprete r has found whateve r he sought, from pantheis m to
personal mysticism , from enrapture d love to law-boun d orthodoxy .
The Mathnawl  is without end, "even if the forests were pens
and the ocean ink" (M 6:2247) , as Ruml says, alluding to the Ko-
ranic claim that God's words are without end (Sura 18:109).
If there was ever an inspired writer among the Muslim mystics , it
was certainl y Jalaluddm . It is said that for the most part he dictated
his verses in a state of rapture or even trance. 30 The birth of such in-
spired poetry—no t rare among Muslim mystics—ca n be witnesse d in
Rumi's enthusiasti c lyrics as well. Their rhythms often suggest the
turning an d whirlin g movemen t out of which they came. It is said
that the hammerin g of the goldsmith s in the bazaar of Konya in-
spired him to dance and to recite verses, as did the sound of the
watermills i n the gardens of Meram. There are probably many more
occasions whe n a mere word or sound struck a responsiv e chord in
him and set him to reciting a new poem. The rhythmica l patterns
28. See A. J. Arberry , Discourses  of Rumi (London , 1961), a translatio n of Fihi ma
fihi.
29. See Reynold A. Nicholson , "The Table-tal k of JalaluMdi n Rumi," Journal  of
the Royal  Asiatic Society, 1924; the letters have been translate d into Turkish , with an
excellent commentary , by Abdiilbak i Golpmarh , Mevldna'nin  Mektuplan  (Istanbul ,
1964).
30. See Hellmu t Ritter, "Philologik a XI: Maulan a Galaluddi n Rumi und sein
Kreis," De r Islam 26 (1942); Ritter, "Neue literatu r iiber Maulan a Calaluddi n Rumi
und seine n orden," Oriens 13-14, no. i (1960), a review of recent publication s about
Rumi an d the Mevlevis . For Rumi's style see Gustav Richter , Dschelaladdin  Rumi.
Eine Stildeutung  in drei Vortrdgen  (Breslau , 1932); Annemari e Schimmel , Die Bilder-
sprache Dschelaladdin  Rumis (Walldorf , 1949); on some of his religiou s ideas see
Alessandro Bausani , "II Pensiero religios o di Maulan a Gialal ad-Din Rumi," Oriente
moderne 3 3 (April 1953).

--- Page 340 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 317
of his lyrics have not yet been analyze d in detail, but even at first
glance the y reveal a predilectio n for comparativel y simple patterns .
The meter s often chosen have a strong hiatus so that the two hemi-
stiches are divided into four parts, sometime s with internal rhyme,
thus resultin g in somethin g very similar to Turkish folk songs. In
many case s one has the feeling that his poems need to be read accord-
ing to word stress rather than by quantitativ e meter. Whether they
are writte n in short, light meters or in long, heavy lines, one often
feels that they should be sung.
It is small wonder that Rumi, expressin g the inner song of his
soul, shoul d have used the imagery of music and dance more fre-
quently tha n any other poet before him. The most famous example
is the introductor y poem of the Mathnawl,  the "Song of the Reed."
The reed flute, complainin g that it has been cut from the reedbed
and longs for home, tells the secrets of divine union and eternal
happiness t o all who have ears to hear. 31 This simile was not in-
vented by Rumi. He often relied upon stories and legends handed
down from time immemorial , endowin g them with new spirit, as he
says:
You may have read it in Kalila,
but that was the husk of the story—thi s is the kernel of
the soul.
(M 4:2203 )
The reed story was taken over from Sana 3! (S 484). He spoke of the
confidant o f a king who became ill because he had been forbidde n
to tell his ruler's secret to anyone; the physicia n sent him to a lonely-
lake, wher e he gave utteranc e to his heart's secret, but the reed grow-
ing at the shore of the lake was later made into a flute and revealed
the secret to the world. This was, originally , the story of "King
Midas wit h the donkey' s ears" (and Midas's old residence , Gordion ,
is not far from Konya) . A similar story is also told about CAH, Mu-
hammad's cousi n and son-in-law , who revealed the divine secrets
that the Prophet had entruste d to him to the lake. This example
shows how , in Rumi's poetry, age-old tradition s are blended with
the mystic' s personal experience .
In a country in which the sound of the Phrygia n flute had been
3i.Hellmut Ritter , "Das Proomiu m des Matnawi- i Maulawi, " Zeitschrift  der
Deutschen Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft  93 (1932), is a study of the sources of Ruml's
introductory verse s to the Mathnawi.

--- Page 341 ---
318 /  THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGAL E
famous sinc e Greek times, he himself , cut off from his beloved, be-
gan complainin g like a flute, telling the secrets of union and long-
ing. Touche d by the breath of the friend, he is able to declare what
would otherwis e remain secret and hidden, just as the rabab or the
harp can only tell its pain when touched by the fingers of the be-
loved. All of Rumi's poetry abounds with symbols taken from music
and mystica l dance; for him, the dance was a life-givin g movement ,
part of the heavenl y dance in which the stars and the angels take
part.
Attempts hav e been made to trace much of Rumi's theology back
to Neoplatoni c influences , but it is almost as impossibl e to disen-
tangle the colorfu l strands of the fabric of his feeling (and, rarely,
his thought ) as it is to analyze one of the colorful brocades of which
he sometime s speaks in his poetry. That there are Neoplatoni c
themes in the Mathnawl  cannot be doubted . On the one hand, he
was acquainte d with Ibn cArabfs teaching s through Sadrudd m Qo-
nawi, whil e on the other, Hellenisti c tradition s were always alive
in the Near East, particularl y in the "countr y of the Romans " (Rum,
hence his surnam e Rumi),  Anatolia . Arabic scientist s and phi-
losophers ha d carefull y preserve d the teaching s of the Greeks, and
even some of Plato's parables found their way into the Mathnawl.
Popular traditio n in the provinc e of Konya has it that Plato lived
for many years in this region and that he was a great sorcerer; close
to the lake of Beyshehi r south of Konya, a Hittite monumen t at a
fountainhead i s called Efldtun Pinan, "Plato's Spring," for it was
here that the great magician transforme d the country into its pres-
ent shape.
Greek and Christia n tradition s were very much alive in Konya in
the thirteent h century . The old centers of Cappadocia n Christianit y
and the large monasti c settlemen t in the caves near Goreme were
only a few days' journey from the capital. Thus images alluding to
Jesus and Mary occur more frequentl y in Jalaluddln' s poetry than
in any other comparabl e poetical work, though such allusion s are
common i n Muslim poetry. Rumi even quotes Biblica l passages
otherwise rarel y mentione d in Islamic poetry. On the whole, how-
ever, his work can be explaine d withou t difficulty from the Koran
and the Propheti c tradition .
Rumi's imagery , both in the lyrics and in the Mathnawl,  reflects
the complet e traditio n of his time. There is not a single poetical or
rhetorical for m that he does not use skillfully , though sometime s he

--- Page 342 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 319
tires of thinking of elegant rhyming words and fills a line with a
jubilant tirilala,  or with the catchword s for the metrica l schemes ,
mufcfilun fcfildtun.  Jalaludd m was usually in high spirits, uplifting
his listener s in order to show them the secrets of love. It would be
wrong to imply that the reader wearies of the constan t repetition s
of high-soarin g religiou s ideas. On the contrary , there are few poets,
especially amon g the mystics, whose repertoir e in vocabular y and
imagery is as rich as his.
Ruml ofte n employ s the simples t situation s of life to catch his
reader's interest—"Di d you hear? Our neighbo r was ill. And what
kind of medicine did they apply?" Of course, it is the illness of love,
as we discover from a thorough descriptio n of the not very heav-
enly symptoms . There was noise at night? The "vessel fell from the
roof" and a lover's secret was revealed (or will be revealed to the
neighbors afte r nine months) . And what happene d yesterday ? The
lulls (Gypsies ) came; we all admired their ropedancin g and joked
with them , "but thine image teaches my soul ropedancin g on thy
black tresses " (D 886, 1198). The cat in the bag, jumpin g restlessl y
up and down, reminds the poet of the way the lover is carried in
the hand of love. The heart s and heads of the lovers are piled up in
front of the beloved as in the shop of a butcher who specialize s in
heads and intestine s (D 1600). The dream figure of the friend comes
into the hot bath of his tears, where the poet's pupil ("the little man
of the eye") sits as watchma n (D 3037).
There is a certain sense of humor in many of these verses, and
Rumi doe s not refrain from using extremel y coarse expression s to
shock, perhap s to awaken , his listeners . He even wrote parodies of
traditional mode s of expression .
Jalaluddm describe s his longing in dramati c images. He is thirsty
like the sand (D 1200); his is the eternal thirst of the lover for more
and more love, the thirst of the dunes, which absorb the water as
soon as it reaches them. Does the lover ever sleep? No, sleep just
looks at him and goes away (D 1444) and sits near someone else; or
the poor fellow dies when he tastes the poisonou s tears in Rumfs
eyes (D 779); or sleep finds his heart tasteless , is mistreate d by the
fists of love, and eventuall y runs away, full of sadness (D 500).
Folk tales , known mainly from the Nasrudd m Khwaja tradition ,
are filled with mystica l meaning . Obscene scenes, mainly in the
fifth book of the Mathnawl,  turn suddenl y into mystica l allegory ,
for "my dirty jokes (hazal) are not dirty jokes but instruction " (M

--- Page 343 ---
320 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
5:2497). A t times, the imagery become s weird, sinister, awkward .
The subconsciou s reminiscenc e of Shamsuddln' s blood before his
door inspire d some of the darkest and yet most impressiv e poems in
the Dlwdn.  There are, for instance , the lines, remarkabl e for their
initial alliteration :
kuh kun az kalla-hd, bahr kun az khun-i ma.
Make a mountai n from skulls, make an ocean from our
blood.
(D 1304)
Or, in a similar context :
This soil is not dust, it is a vessel full of blood,
of the blood of the lovers.
(D 336)
And there are poems in soft meters, full of tenderness :
Open the veil and close our door—
You are and I, and empty the house.
(D 2728)
Without you r speech the soul has no ear,
Without you r ear the soul has no tongue .
(D 697)
These verse s contain unforgettabl e images, which, though taken in
large par t from the traditiona l stock of Persian poetry, convey a
completely differen t feeling with the change of a single accent or the
addition o f an adjective .
The master s of early Sufism become , in Rumfs work as in Sanaa's
and even more in c Attar's, symbols for the differen t spiritua l stages
and states . Numerou s allusion s to Hallaj, the martyr of love, per-
meate bot h Ruml's Dlwdn and the Mathnawl.  Hallaj's verse, "Kill
me, o my trustworth y friends, " become s a key word for Rumi's
thought. On e of the central motifs in his poetry is that of dying and
thus gainin g a new life, faithful to the Propheti c tradition , "die
before ye die." To prove the truth of this hadith, an d of Hallaj's re-
lated poem , Rumi sometime s combine s very strange images . Even
the chickpe a become s the symbol of the human situatio n (M 3:
4158):32 pu t in boiling water, the vegetabl e complain s and tries to
32. Annemari e Schimmel , "Zu einigen Versen Dschelaladdi n Rumis, " Anatolica  i
(1967)-

--- Page 344 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / $21
jump out of the kettle. But the poet tells it that since it grew by the
rain and sunshin e of divine grace, it now must learn to suffer in the
fire of divine wrath in order to mature. The person who cooks the
chickpeas i s comparabl e to Abraham , who was willing to slaughte r
his belove d son; "the eternal goal is your surrender. " Only by such
willing surrende r can the vegetabl e reach the stage of animal life
and be endowed with spirit an d thought .
Not-being i s necessar y for becomin g and being. All the masters
seek not-bein g and breaking , because only then can God work upon
them (M 6:1467-74) . c Attar had already spoken of the necessit y of
"being eaten, " and Rumi, with his remarkabl e fondnes s for images
taken from the kitchen, imitated him. Life is a constant movement ,
and no stage can be reached until the previou s stage has been ful-
filled. The caravan has to be ready for the sound of the bell that calls
it to journey toward new station s (D 1789). And out of the dust
grow plants , which in turn are transforme d into a higher form of
life throug h annihilation . Rumi sometime s used the commercia l
terminology foun d in the Koran:
With God is the best bargain: he buys from you your
dirty fortun e and gives in exchang e light of the soul,
He buys the ice of the perishabl e body and gives a king-
dom beyon d imagination .
(M 6:880-81 )
Rumi's descriptio n of this upward movemen t of the soul—usuall y
explained a s a poetic version of the Neoplatoni c idea of the return of
the soul to its divine origin—intereste d Western scholar s from the
very beginnin g of their acquaintanc e with Rumi. More than 150
years ago , Riickert translate d a passage from the Mathnawl  (M
3:3901-6) int o German , without , however , translatin g the last, de-
cisive, line :
I died as mineral and became a plant,
I died as plant and rose to animal.
I died as animal and I was Man.
Why shoul d I fear? When was I less by dying?
Yet once more I shall die as Man, to soar
With angel s blest; but even from angelhoo d
I must pass on: all except God doth perish.
When I have sacrifice d my angel-soul ,

--- Page 345 ---
322 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
I shall become what no mind e'er conceived .
O let me not exist! For Non-existenc e
Proclaims i n organ tones "To him we shall return!"
Nonexistence, c adam, is the ineffabl e divine essence , which has been
seen in this way by some of the mystics , and particularl y by Rumi,
because i t is beyond every possible mode of expressio n or imagina -
tion—it is like the neti neti of the Upanishads . A little later in his
work, Rum i took up the same idea (M 4:3637-60) , ending, how-
ever, by likening the world to a dream and death to mornin g light—
another commo n image among the Sufis. Even in his lyrics, the
development fro m dust to plant and then to animal is mentioned ,
sometimes wit h an emphasi s on the humilit y and poverty of dust.
When ma n become s as lowly as dust—an d only under that conditio n
—plants ma y grow out of him, and a heart will be given to him. To
be broken and low is the conditio n for developmen t toward higher
stages of life.
Islamic modernist s have seen in Ruml's poem "I died as mineral "
a perfect expressio n of Darwin' s theories ; this interpretatio n was
probably originate d by the Indian scholar Maulan a Shibli in his
Urdu biograph y of Rumi (1903), which deeply influence d Iqbal's
ideas. Som e Pakistan i scholars have found evidenc e for the idea of
evolution alread y anticipate d in the Middle Ages, a proof of the
scientific strengt h of medieva l Muslim s (such as Khalifa cAbdul
Hakim);33 other s regard Rumi's verses as pointin g to the free de-
velopment o f the ego, which rises to ever higher levels of conscious -
ness (such as Afzal Iqbal), or as the eternal striving for more and
more freedo m and individualizatio n (Muhamma d Iqbal), or as an
expression o f the struggle for surviva l inheren t in creatio n (Ab-
dulbaki Golpmarh) . But the quotatio n of Hallaj's verses at the
turning poin t of the chickpe a story, where the vegetabl e calls out,
Kill me, o my trustworth y friends,
for in my being killed is my life,34
lends itsel f to a purely mystica l interpretatio n and seems to exclude
a pseudoscientifi c understandin g of such verses. To gain a higher
life throug h death and spiritua l resurrectio n is the goal of the lov-
ers; it is the constan t interpla y of fana and baqd, as expresse d even
33. See Khalifa cAbdul Hakim , The Metaphysics  of Rumi (Lahore, ca. 1954).
34. Husay n ibn Mansur al-Hallaj , Diwan, ed. Louis Massignon , Journal asiatique,
January-July, 1931 , qasida 10.

--- Page 346 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 323
through th e ritual of the enrapturin g dance. And the mystics know
that this first dying implies more and more acts of spiritua l sur-
render, eac h of which ends on a higher level of spiritual life—the
Goethean "Stirb  und Werde."
The idea of constan t developmen t even after death has been
maintained b y a number o f Sufis, as well as by some modern West-
ern philosopher s and theologians . In the Muslim world, Muham -
mad Iqba l gave this idea of constant developmen t a new interpre -
tation in his poetical works, which appeare d from 1915 until 1935.
This goal can be symbolize d in terms of the most diverse aspects of
life; the images offered themselve s to everybod y who had eyes to see.
Only whe n man become s deprived of outward being like
winter,
there is hope for a new spring to develop in him.
(M 5:552)
William Hasti e was quite right to call his adaptation s of Rumi's
poetry Festival  of Spring. The same themes of death and resurrec -
tion that are reflected in those verses by Rumi just mentione d per-
meate his spring poetry.
Spring ha s always been a favorite subject for Persian and Turkish
poets, but the exuberanc e of Rumi's numerou s spring poems can be
fully appreciate d only by those who have experience d how, in a sud-
den outburst , the vast plain of Konya is covered with green after a
spring thunderstorm , which makes the roses blossom and the igde
open and fills the air with strong fragrance . This spring is really a
qiyamat, a  day of resurrection , which calls forth from the dark dust
flowers an d leaves. Enchante d by the spring breeze of love, the
leaves danc e and the flowers praise God in their own silent lan-
guage. Rum i had heard this praise and taken part in it, translatin g
it into melodiou s lines; he had seen the lovelines s of the heavenl y
beloved in roses, hyacinths , and running brooks, each of them re-
flecting it and yet forming a colorful veil for that beauty that is too
radiant to be seen unveiled . He knew the fragranc e of an Anatolia n
morning i n May; in his verses he alludes often to the scents that are
still characteristi c of an Anatolia n town. He has experience d divine
beauty an d majesty with all his senses: in the sight of the gardens of
Konya, in the sound of the thunder or of the meaningfu l prayer of
the birds, in the soft touch of the silks or the carpets manufacture d
in Konya , in the fragranc e of the igde, as well as in the taste of the

--- Page 347 ---
324 /  THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGAL E
delicious food , especiall y the sweetmea t for which Konya has al-
ways been famous . Sensual experience s are reflected strongly in his
poetry; on e of the reasons why these verses never fade or lose their
charm is that the balance between sensual experienc e and divine
love is maintained . Rumi has transforme d even the roughest , most
ordinary aspec t of life; and the symbol of the transformin g power
of the sun, which he uses so often in connectio n with Shamsuddin ,
can be applied to his poetic touch as well.
Rumi's strengt h came from his love, a love experience d in human
terms but completel y grounde d in God. No one has disclosed the
deepest secret s of mystical prayer as he did; he felt that every prayer
was in itself an act of divine grace, and he left himself open to this
divine grace . United in love with the divine will, he found solu-
tions for the enigma of predestinatio n and was able to rise to the
zenith of joy from the deepest depression s of separation . He himself
summed u p his life in two lines:
And the result is not more than these three words:
I burnt, and burnt, and burnt.
(D 1768)
Shortly afte r Rumi's death, his works, especiall y his Mathnawl,
were know n all over the Persian-speakin g world, and his fame
reached th e eastern fringes of the Muslim lands. In East Bengal, in
the fifteent h century , its impressio n was so great that a chronicle r
said: "Th e holy Brahmi n will recite the Mathnawl.' >35 The first
major contribution s to an understandin g of his poetry were made
in Turkey itself. The Mevlev i order, which had been institution -
alized by Sultan Walad and whose ritual was later elaborated , spread
Rumi's wor d and music through the just-emergin g Ottoma n Em-
pire; and in later times the head of the Mevlev i order was so closely
connected wit h the Ottoman court that he had the privilege of gird-
ing the Sultan with the sword.
The cente r of the order was always in Konya; the leader was called
by the honorifi c titles Molla Hunka r and Qelebi. Many smaller
tekkes of the Mevlevi s were found all over the Ottoman Empire , as
far away as Egypt and Syria, although the order never crossed the
Ottoman borders . Nor did Rumi's poetry become as popular with
the Arabic-speakin g Sufis as with the Persian-speakin g mystics ; the
imagery use d was too different , and even the few Arabic translation s
35. Enamu l Haq, Muslim Bengali Literature  (Karachi , 1957), p. 42.

--- Page 348 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 325
made in classical times did not help much toward a deeper under-
standing o f RumFs ideas.
At the occasion of the ceremonia l sama c, usually held on Friday
at noon after the congregationa l prayer, 36 the dervishe s used to wear
their typica l dress: a tennure, a white sleeveles s frock, the destegiil,
a jacket with long sleeves , a belt, and a black khirqa, used as an over-
coat but cast aside before the ritual dance started. The head was
covered b y a high felt cap around which a turban cloth might be
wound. Th e cap, sikke, became the typical sign of the Mevlevis , and
many inscription s compose d of words of prayers or blessing s have
been writte n in the shape of the dervish hat.
The samd c is regulate d by very strict rules. The sheikh stands in
the most honored corner of the dancing place, and the dervishe s
pass by him three times, each time exchangin g greetings , until the
circling movemen t starts. This is to be performe d on the right foot,
with acceleratin g speed. If a dervish should become too enraptured ,
another Sufi , who is in charge of the orderly performance , will
gently touc h his frock in order to curb his movement . The dance
of the dervishe s is one of the most impressiv e features of the mysti-
cal life in Islam, and the music accompanyin g it is of exquisit e
beauty, beginnin g with the great hymn in honor of the Prophe t
(nact-i sharif,  written by Jalaluddl n himself ) and ending with
short, enthusiasti c songs, sometime s sung in Turkish .
The intens e love for music that the Mevlevi s inherite d from their
master Jalaluddl n has inspired many classica l musician s and com-
posers in the Ottoma n Empire . In fact, the best pieces of Turkish
classical music , such as those by cltrl (seventeent h century) , were
composed b y artists who were either member s of, or at least loosely
connected with , the order. The same is true of the calligrapher s and
miniaturists, man y of whom belonge d to the Mevlevis . The order
furnished Turkis h society with some of the finest examples of Mus-
lim art ever created. 37
The Turk s were deeply attached to their Hazret-i  Mevldna,  and
Turkish scholar s and mystics have contribute d a great deal to a bet-
ter understandin g of the Mathnaiui. 38 In the late sixteent h and early
36. See the literatur e mentione d in chapter 3, notes 87-94.
37. §ehabetti n Uzluk, Mevlevilikte  Resim, Resimde  Mevleviler  (Ankara , 1957).
38. Mehme t Onder, Mevldna  (Ankara , 1971); Onder, Mevldna  §iirleri Antolojisi,  ad
ed. (Konya , Turkey, 1956, 1957). The best introductio n to the personalit y and the
survival o f Rumi has been written by the Turkish scholar Abdiilbak i Golpinarl i in
his two books Mevldna  Celdleddin,  hayati, felsefesi, eserlerinden  sefmeler  (Istanbul ,

--- Page 349 ---
326 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
seventeenth centurie s three famous commentarie s on the Mathnawi
were writte n in Turkey . The one by Isma cll Riisuh i Ankaraw i (d.
1631) is still considere d the best commentar y available . A century
later, anothe r commentar y was written by Isma cil Haqqi Bursali,
himself a  fine mystica l poet (d. 1724), and about the same time
Siileyman Nahif i (d. 1738) translate d the entire work into Turkish
verse, faithfull y preservin g the meter and the form. This seems to
be the first complet e translatio n into a foreign languag e in which
concern fo r the meter was paramount ; in later times we find similar
attempts i n the Subcontinent , where Urdu, Panjabi , and Sindhi
translations hav e been produce d in the same style. 39
Most of the Turkish poets, from Gulshan i in the fifteent h cen-
tury on, have paid tribute to Mevlana. Amon g the successfu l artists
of the Mevlev i order, the name of Ghalib Dede (d. 1799), the sheikh
of the conven t in Galata, should be mentioned . He was an excellen t
poet, perhap s the last true master of classica l Turkish poetry, and
his verses express the inward fire that enabled the dervishe s to spin
around thei r axes and become transporte d in ecstatic flights. The
nineteenth century , too, had poets who sang in honor of Rumi, and
in recent years an amazin g number of verses have been written in
his honor by member s of divergen t groups; from very orthodo x
preachers t o leftist politicians , from representative s of surrealisti c
art to satirists . And if the long list of names that could easily be
drawn up were not sufficien t to show the love of the Turks for
"their" Mevlan a (for they will never admit that he was not a Turk),
the thousand s of visitors who com e to pay their respect at his shrine
in Konya and the large crowds that throng there for the festivitie s
in commemoratio n of his death in Decembe r would prove how
deeply thi s love is rooted even forty-fiv e years after Atatiirk closed
the dervis h lodges and strictly prohibite d any activity of mystica l
fraternities.
Rumi's wor k was widely read in Iran up to the Safawid period,
when the interest in Sufi literatur e was curbed. A number of com-
mentaries an d imitation s of the Mathnawi  have been preserve d from
1951; 3d ed., 1959), and Mevldna'dan  sonra Mevlevilik  (Istanbul , 1953), a history of the
order. Golpmar h has also translate d most of Rumi's lyrics into Turkis h and con-
tributed t o the study of rare manuscript s concernin g the Mevlevis .
39. Annemari e Schimmel , Mevlana  Celdlettin  Rumi'nin  §ark ve garpta tesirleri
(Ankara, 1963) ; Schimmel , "Rumi's Influenc e on Muslim Literature, " in Guldeste
(Konya, Turkey , 1971), a collectio n of papers on Rumi.

--- Page 350 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 327
the fifteent h century , and Jam! attests that the early Naqshband l
master Khwaj a Parsa "took omen from the Dlvdn-i Shams-i Tabriz"
(N 393). The activitie s of Persian scholars in our day aimed toward
producing a n authenti c text of the Dlwdn—as  it was done by Badi cuz-
Zaman Furuzanfar—i s matche d only by Reynol d A. Nicholson' s
edition of the Mathnawl. 40
Rumi's wor k had its largest influenc e in the Indo-Pakista n Sub-
continent, wher e his poetry has been popular since the early four-
teenth century . The Chishti saints of Delhi, beginning  with Nizam-
uddm Auliya , studied the Mathnawl  (for they permitte d mystica l
dance and were, thus, prone to give expressio n to the enthusiasti c
spirit of Rumi's verses). Shams-i Tabriz became a legendary figure
in India and was often counted among the martyrs of love. The in-
terest in Rumi's work seems to have been commo n to all classes of
society—the Mogu l emperor s (especiall y Akbar) were as fond of him
as the simple villager s in Sind and Punjab . Aurangze b shed tears
when listenin g to a beautiful recitation of the Mathnawl,  as did his
brother, th e mysticall y minded Dara Shikoh. During the time of
their father , Shah Jihan, a number of commentarie s on the Math-
nawl were compose d in Muslim India, as well as glossaries , indexes,
anthologies, an d imitations. 41 Even Aurangzeb' s daughter , Zeb un-
NisaD, hersel f a talented poetess, ordered her poet friends to com-
pose a Mathnawl  imitatin g Rumi's work. A glance through Indo-
Persian poetr y reveals many lines inspired by Rumi's thought s and
expressions. Tha t is true even in our day; Iqbal was deeply influ-
enced by Maulan a and inserted many of his lines into his own
works, mainl y into his mathnawls,  which he wrote in the same meter
as that of his master's Mathnawl.  It is said that some mystics in
Sind—and i t may be true for other province s as well—kep t only three
books for spiritual nourishment : the Koran, the Mathnawl,  and the
Dlwdn of Hafiz. 42 Quotation s from Rumi permeate the Sindhi verses
of the eighteenth-centur y poet Shah cAbduDl-Lat!f, an d it would be
easy to draw up an inventor y of all the verses used in Indo-Pakistan i
40. Maulan a Jalaludd m RumT, Dlwdn-i  kabir ya Kulliyat-i  Shams, ed. Badi cuz-
Zaman Furuzanfar , 10 vols. (Tehran, 1336 sh./ig57) ; see the Bibliograph y under Fu-
ruzanfar fo r his other studies.
41. See Ethe, "Neupersisch e Literatur, " in Grundriss,  ed. Geiger and Kuhn, 2:301.
A useful analytica l index, to mention only one example from the immens e production ,
is Tilmidh Husayn , Mir^at al-mathnawi  (Hyderabad , Deccan, 1352 h./1933-34) .
42. Ghula m Mustaf a QasimI, "Hashimiy a Library, " in Mihran  ja Moti (Karachi ,
1959). P- 309-

--- Page 351 ---
328 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
literature writte n in the vernacular s that are inspired by the great
mystic's work .
Most of the poets of the Subcontinent—a s in Turkey—sa w in
RumI a representativ e of the pantheisti c trend that had colored
most Sufi expression s after Ibn cArabi's time . He was interprete d as
a mouthpiec e of Ibn cArabi's ideas , and only toward the beginnin g
of the twentiet h century were new approache s made toward a better
understanding. Muhamma d Iqbal, no doubt, understoo d best the
dynamic forc e behind Rumi's experiences , though he highlight s
only one of the numerou s aspects of the great lover. But in many
respects hi s interpretatio n appeals more to the modern mind than
many of the traditiona l interpretations , which try to tie the free-
roaming spiri t to a theosophica l system. 43
It is good to see that there are still many possibilitie s for under-
standing Rumi' s enrapturin g poetry in ever fresh ways, and that
both orienta l and Wester n scholar s are continuin g their study of
his inexhaustibl e treasure of poetry.
TURKISH POPULAR MYSTICISM
Jalaluddm Rumi' s influenc e had been a living force in
the developmen t of Turkish mysticism , literature , and fine arts. But
there are other, perhaps even more typical, expression s of the Sufi
experience i n the area of the late Seljukid and expandin g Ottoma n
Empire.44
A folk tale tells how the city of Konya got its name (a name that
is, of course, derived from Iconium) : "Two saints came from Khu-
rasan, gentl y flying and spreadin g their wings until they saw the
summits o f the two hills that bound the Konya plain. They liked the
view, and the one asked the other: Konahm  mi? 'Shall we dwell
there?' An d the other replied : Kon ya! 'Certainly , alight and
dwell!' " This story, with its simple pun, shows that the Anatolia n
people wer e well aware that the stronges t influenc e upon the forma-
tion of mystica l thought came from Khurasan , the eastern part of
Iran, a country in which Sufism had always flourishe d and which
43. Annemari e Schimmel , Gabriel's  Wing: A Study into the Religious  Ideas of Sir
Muhammad Iqbal  (Leiden , 1963), pp. 353 ff. and bibliography .
44. Spero s Vryonis , Jr., The Decline  of Medieval  Hellenism  in Asia Minor and the
Process o f Islamization  from the Eleventh  through  the Fifteenth  Century  (Berkeley ,
1971), deals , among other things, with the Mevleviyy a and the other orders and their
role in the Islamizatio n of Turkey .

--- Page 352 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 329
became, in popular geography, almost coterminus with "the eastern
and northern lands of Islam." In fact, that area had produced a
number of outstanding mystics.
The first great representative of "Turkish" mystical literature is
Ahmad Yasawi (d. 1166), a disciple of Yusuf Hamadham, thus
springing from the same spiritual root as the Naqshbandiyya, who
were to become so powerful in the Turkish areas of Central Asia
and in Southeast Asia. Ahmad Yasawi's Hikam  are the first known
sentences of mystical wisdom written in the Turkic language of the
area of Yassi in present Uzbekistan.45
Jalaluddm Rumi on occasion played with a few Turkish words
in his poetry, and his son, Sultan Walad, used Turkish very skill-
fully in his Diwdn.  But it was Sultan Walad's contemporary Yunus
Emre in central Anatolia who transformed his Turkish mother
tongue into a vehicle for mystical expression; he left Turkey a trea-
sure of his simple, deep-felt, touchingly memorable poems, which
are still known today by school children.46 Those who have had the
opportunity of listening to the Turkish composer Adnan Saygun's
Yunus Emre  Oratoryusu  will have realized, to their surprise, how
traditional dervish melodies and modern musical technique can be
blended into an impressive work of art. The most typical and almost
haunting passage of the Oratorio  is that moment when the chorus
repeats, as basso  ostinato,  the refrain of one of Yunus's poems— askm
ver, sevkin  ver, "give Thy love, give longing for Thee" (Y 584). The
modern composer aptly chose this expression of everlasting love, of
never-ending yearning, as a central motif of his composition. Yunus
stands with these words in the tradition of classical Sufism.
Not much is known about Yunus Emre's life. He seems to have
grown up in the circles of Turkish Sufis that had slowly emerged
after the Seljukid conquest of eastern and central Anatolia (i.e.,
after 1071). These Sufi groups partly continued the tradition of
Ahmad Yasawi and were also probably inspired by those mystics
who left eastern Iran on the arrival of the Mongols in the early
thirteenth century. Yunus was, as he says, a disciple of a mystic
called Tapduq Emre for forty years (the number of perseverance).
45. Mehmet Fuat Kopriilii, Turk  edebiyatinda  ilk mutesawiflar,  zA ed. (Ankara,
1966).
46. Yunus Emre, Divan,  ed. Abdulbaki Golpmarli (Istanbul, 1948); see also Yunus
Emre, Risalat  an-nushiyye  ve Divan,  ed. Abdulbaki Golpinarh (Istanbul, 1965). G61-
pmarli, Yunus  Emre, Hayati  (Istanbul, 1936); Son Huri, "Yunus Emre: In Memoriam,"
Moslem World  49, no. 2 (1959); Annemarie Schimmel, "Yunus Emre," Numen  8, no.
i (1961); Yves Regnier, L e "divan"  de Yunus Emre  (Paris, 1963).

--- Page 353 ---
330 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Those called Emre  probably formed a subgroup of mystics in Ana-
tolia, where the system of loosely affiliating oneself with a spiritual
guide was apparently still in use; the major orders had not yet devel-
oped a "missionary" activity. The mystical poet wandered through
the country—he may even have met Rumi during the latter's last
years. According to the most recent research, he died in 1321 at the
age of 72; numerous places in Turkey claim to house his real tomb.
Just as his tomb will probably never be certainly identified, it is
almost impossible to select those poems that are really his. The dif-
ferent editions of his Dlwdn  brought out by the indefatigable
Turkish scholar Abdiilbaki Golpmarli show the learned author's
increasing skepticism as to the authenticity of Yunus's poems. At
present it seems impossible to establish a reliable text—a fact that
holds true for many other popular Turkish poets. Their collections
have been augmented by additions from later poets, and many of
them reflect rather a whole tradition—that of poems sung in the tek-
kes, the centers of Sufi life—than the original work of a single poet.
The genre of ildhi,  a mystical poem in popular meter meant to be
sung in the meetings of the dervishes, is the typical expression of
this tradition.
It is a comfortable working hypothesis to accept as Yunus Emre's
the poems collected by Golpmarli in his 1943 edition, though many
of them are now considered spurious. Yet, they reveal who Yunus
might have been and how he might have felt. Numerous other
poets could not help writing in exactly the same strain of thought,
with the same images and puns.
Yunus Emre often used the classical quantitative Persian meters
in his poetry, preferring the easiest ones; Rumi, too, had often
chosen meters in which each hemistich can be split by a caesura
into two parts to produce the so-called musammat  form. Using this
device, both Rumi and Yunus get close to the simple forms of Turk-
ish folk songs, with their four-line verses rhyming in a  a a a, b b b a.
Yunus skillfully applied the classical meters to his own simple
mother tongue, but his best poems are written in Turkish popular
meters, in which syllable counting is the essential requirement (e.g.,
8+7, 8+8, 6+6 syllables).
Yunus was a master of description; his images were inspired not
only by the stock of tradition but by the daily life of Anatolia as
well. One has to know the endless roads through the Anatolian

--- Page 354 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 331
highlands to really enjoy the freshness of Yunus's verses. Like many
mystics before him and even more after him, he talks to the water-
wheel, whose wailing sound, so typical of Near Eastern countries,
makes him understand that it is cut off from its roots and relates the
pangs of separation from its forest as eloquently as Rumi's reed
flute tells of its longing for its reedbed home. The stone-breasted
mountain ranges are Yunus's personal enemies, since they try to
separate him from his beloved master; but the cloud, hanging like
black tresses from the head of the snow-covered hills, loosens her
hair and weeps for him (Y 252). His heart turns to a torrent, and his
whole body is reduced to dust in the summer heat, moved by the
wind of love, which carries it to an unknown destination. "Look,
what love has made of me!" is the refrain of one of his most popular
poems (Y 124).
Yunus faithfully follows the patterns set by classical Sufism.
Meditating upon death and the Last Judgment, he describes the
horror of the day when man "has to wear a shirt without collar and
sleeves" and the "negro," i.e., the questioning angel, interrogates
him (Y 133). His faith is firmly grounded in the Koran:
Whoever does not know the Koran
is as if he were never born.
(Y5o8)
The five ritual prayers are fundamental, but almost as important
as ritual prayer is the dhikr  that is uttered by all nature. Yunus is
one of those mystics who listen to and join in the constant dhikr  of
everything created:
With the mountains, with the stones
Will I call Thee, Lord, o Lord!
With the birds in early dawn
Will I call Thee, Lord, o Lord!
With the fishes in the sea,
With gazelles in deserts free,
With the mystics' call "O He!"
Will I call Thee, Lord, o Lord!
(Y 552)
The profession of faith, used as dhikr  formula, is

--- Page 355 ---
332 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
honey for those who are bees,
a rose for those who are nightingales.
(Y 534)
As shown with great insight by John R. Walsh,47 a number of
Yunus's poems, repeating al-hamdulilldh,  "praise be to God," or
other pious sentences at the end of each verse, were probably meant
to be recited as dhikr  formulae in the dervish communities.
Yunus's most subtle poem, which sings of the constant remem-
brance of God in Paradise, is still memorized in Turkish schools:
§ol cinnetin  irmaklan  . . .
The rivers all in Paradise
Flow with the word Allah, Allah,
And ev'ry longing nightingale
He sings and sings Allah, Allah.
(Y477)
Everything in Paradise, be it voice, scent, breeze, or growing and
loving, is nothing else than "Allah," since everything is lost in Him.
This is the paradise of the mystic who does not care for a house and
a few houris who are thousands of years old: the vision of the divine
beloved is Paradise, and those who are deprived of this vision ex-
perience Hell in every place.
Like his fellow mystics, Yunus was an ardent lover of the Prophet
Muhammad, and when modern Turkish interpreters of his poetry
tend to regard him as a representative of unorthodox "Turkish na-
tional piety," they forget how deeply rooted in the Muslim tradi-
tion is his mystical approach. The Prophet is the intercessor, the
goal of creation; his name is beautiful, as is he himself:
Every bee that enters the beehive
speaks a thousand and one blessings over Muhammad.
(Y 524)
Yunus's poetry reflects the different stages of the mystic—asceti-
cism, loneliness in this world, and uncertainty, until he is safe and
at peace in the company of his sheikh: "Yunus was a falcon, perched
on Tapduq's arm" (Y 179). He firmly believes in the power of the
men of God (erenler),  but he also knows that even the sheikh can
47. John R. Walsh, "Yunus Emre: A Medieval Hymnodist," Numen  7, nos. 2-3
(1960).

--- Page 356 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 333
only prepare man for union, which depends solely upon grace (cf. Y
516).
Like other Sufi poets, Yunus once rebelled in a long poem (Y 353)
against the eschatological descriptions contained in the Koran and
expanded by later theologians and writers. He began:
0 God, should you once ask me [on the Day of Judg-
ment],
then I will tell you this: . . .
He then goes on to ridicule the idea of the eschatological bridge:
Why should it be only a hair's breadth when men are accustomed
to building bridges wide enough to cross without endangering
life? Why should God put up scales for weighing the sordid sins
of man? He discusses the various aspects of Doomsday until he final-
ly resigns himself to the inscrutable will of God and asks forgive-
ness. This subject has been repeated by a number of Turkish mysti-
cal poets; Kaygusuz Abdal in the fifteenth century invites God
Himself to pass over such a useless bridge, and the Bektashi poet
cAzmi in the late sixteenth century asks the Lord:
What have you to do with this hellfire?
Are you the owner of a hot bath, or are you a kulhan-
beyi? [i.e., one who sits in the ashes of the bath house
to keep himself warm; hence, a destitute person].48
Such teasing of God is an exception with Yunus, but is not rare in
later Bektashi poetry.
Yunus Emre's verses, particularly those in classical meters, often
reflect the all-embracing "cosmic consciousness." The same poet
who cried in fear of Hell and trembled under the burden of his
sins feels that this world and the next are filled with the grandeur
of God and, at the same time, that the beloved is hidden in his own
innermost heart. This may lead him to identify his heart and the
All and make him sing in jubilant verses:
1 am the First and the Last. .
I am he who gave Noah the flood . .
I am the Seer, I am the Taker and the Giver.
Or he may identify himself with all the prophets, with all the lovers
and those who suffered for their love, like Jonah or Mansur Hallaj.
48. Vasfi Mahir Kocatiirk, Tekke  §iiri Antolojisi  (Ankara, 1955), p. 219.

--- Page 357 ---
334 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
These poems are in form and content almost identical with later
Sufi poetry written in the several languages of the Indian Subconti-
nent.
One of Yunus's poems has attracted the interest of both Turkish
mystics and Western historians of literature. It is a so-called tek-
erleme, a genre typical of Turkish folk poetry, comparable to non-
sense verses and nursery rhymes in European languages (Y 131).
This poem begins with the lines:
I climbed upon the plum tree,
To pluck grapes there—
The master of the garden asked me:
Why do you eat my walnut?
And a later line, "The fish climbed upon the poplar tree to eat there
pickled pitch," has become proverbial: "When the fish climbs on
the poplar tree" means "never," or "when the pig flies"—the same
expression is, incidentally, also found in the mystical poetry of
Kabir in India.49
Yunus's tekerleme,  which is by no means unique in Turkish
mystical poetry, has been commented upon by many Turkish mys-
tics. The commentary of Niyazi Misri (d. 1697), himself a fine poet
and advanced spiritual leader, gives a good introduction to the
traditional method of interpretation:50
With this verse the poet wants to show that every tree of deeds has a
special kind of fruit. Just as in the external world every fruit has a tree
of its own, thus every deed has an instrument of its own by which it can
be reached: thus, for example, the instruments for acquiring external
sciences are language, grammar, syntax, logic, literature, scholastics,
rhetoric, jurisprudence, the study of Prophetic traditions and of the
commentaries of the Koran, philosophy and astronomy. To acquire the
internal sciences, however, the instruments are permanent sincere sub-
mission and constant recollection of God and the "inner leader," little
food, little speech, little sleep, keeping away from human beings. And
to attain Reality, the instrument is the renunciation of the world, re-
nunciation of the otherworld, and the renunciation of existence.
Now, the most venerable master hints with "prune," "grape," and
"nut" at the Divine law, sharl ca, the mystical Path, tariqa,  and Divine
Reality, haqlqa.  For one eats the outer parts of the prune, but not its in-
terior. Whatever is like the prune, corresponds to the outward side of
actions.
As for the grape, it is eaten, and many delicious things are made of it:
49. Charlotte Vaudeville, Kabir  Granthvali  (Doha)  (Pondicherry, 1957), no. 12.
50. Hamza Tahir, "At-tasawwuf ash-shacbl fPl-adab at-turki," Majalla  Kulliyat  al-
dddb 12, no. 2 (Cairo, 1950).

--- Page 358 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 335
sausage, thick juice, pickles, vinegar and similar edibles and many other
good things. But since still a few kernels of hypocrisy, fame, vanity, and
ostentation exist in it, it is called "interior acts," but not "Reality."
The nut, now, is completely a symbol of Reality. In the interior of the
nut there is nothing that must be thrown away. Its interior is com-
pletely edible, and for how many illnesses is it a remedy!
The master of the garden is the perfect mystical leader. One can discern
the different fruits only with his help and eventually reach reality ....
This interpretation may or may not be correct, but it shows how
commentators in later centuries discovered the tenets of mystical
truth even in a tekerleme.
Turkish mystics were apparently fond of such simple poems, and
here mention must be made of Kaygusuz Abdal, a Bektashi mystic
who lived in the fifteenth century, probably in the European prov-
inces of the Ottoman Empire. He is said to have settled in Cairo to
found a Bektashi convent; according to tradition, his tomb is on
the Muqattam Hill, where many saints of Cairo are buried.51 Kay-
gusuz may have been one of the abddldn-i  Rum,  dervishes who wan-
dered through the Ottoman Empire covered with animal skins and
wearing a silver earring. A model case of this kind of dervish was a
certain Barak Baba in the fourteenth century, who went around
shouting like a bear and dancing like a monkey, according to the
sources. The abddldn-i  Rum were also notorious for their use of
opium. One finds reminiscences of these groups in the paintings
ascribed to the fifteenth-century painter known as Siyah Kalam,
which show strange, wild people who form almost perfect illustra-
tions for the poetry of Kaygusuz.52
Kaygusuz's poetry is among the strangest expressions of Sufism.
He does not hesitate to describe in great detail his dreams of good
food—God is asked to grant him hundreds of plates, filled with
halvah, roast lamb's leg, all kinds of soups, vegetables, and even
roast pork! Nor does he shrink from singing about his love ad-
ventures with a charming young man, who tries to get rid of this
crude dervish with his old fur cap and his stick, this nuisance who
51. Kaygusuz  Abdal, Hatayi, Kul Himmet  (Istanbul, 1953); Annemarie Schimmel,
"Drei tiirkische Mystiker: Yunus Emre, Kaygusuz Abdal, Pir Sultan Abdal," Mittei-
lungen de r Deutsch-Tiirkischen  Gesellschaft,  no. 48 (1962). See also the German
verse translations of all the mystics mentioned, and others as well, in Annemarie
Schimmel, Au s dem goldenen  Becker. Tiirkische  Poesie vom 13. bis 20. Jahrhundert
(Istanbul, 1973).
52. About this artist see Emel Esin, "The Turkish Baksi and the Painter Muham-
mad Siyah Kalam," Acta  Orientalia  32 (1970). A number of studies of Siyah Kalam
have been published both in Turkey and in the West in the last fifteen years.

--- Page 359 ---
336 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
wants to kiss his peachlike face and his honey lips—a lively parody
of the numberless love lyrics praising the attractive youth as a mani-
festation of divine beauty. Most amusing is Kaygusuz's poem on
the goose that he tries to cook with the help of the Seven and the
Nine (groups of the mystical hierarchy): "I cooked it forty days, and
yet it was not done," and even the bulghur that he throws into the
broth says "Allah" and flies away, while the goose lifts its head from
the pan and grins. This stubborn, die-hard animal is probably the
lower soul, which the poet found difficult to tame.
A tekerleme  by Kaygusuz sounds like a perfect translation of a
nursery rhyme:
kaplu kaplu  bagalar kanatlanmis  upmaga
The turturturtles have taken wings to fly
It is difficult to decide whether verses like this contain some deeper
mystical wisdom or whether they belong to a secret language known
to exist in certain dervish circles. Hellmut Ritter has discovered a
Turkish vocabulary in which kitchen expressions are equated with
mystical terms—"martyr son of a martyr" is lamb, biryam,  the
"Highest Judge" is halvah,  etc.53 These verses may also express a
simple joy in nonsensical poetry, which is, in a way, closer to the
mystical reality tha$ other poetical forms, the paradox being the
most legitimate form of guiding the seeker toward the goal. Such
poems may as easily be interpreted as results of "trips," and this
possibility, at least in the case of Kaygusuz Abdal, cannot be ex-
cluded, since the word kaygusuz,  "sans souci,"  has been used as a
secret name for hashish, as Golpmarh has shown. The use of drugs
was—and still is—quite common in the lower levels of some mystical
fraternities, particularly among the musicians.
One may ask how the poetry of Ytinus and Kaygusuz can be ex-
plained in the framework of Sufism. One feels in their—and in
many of their fellow mystics'—poetry "that there is vast unleashed
power," as an art historian has so poignantly described Turkish
art.54 Only a few of these poems are the products of learning and
school wisdom; many of them are "inspired" in one way or the
other. Even in contemporary Turkey similar cases of inspiration
53. Hellmut Ritter, "Philologika IX: Die vier SuhrawardI," De r Islam  25 (1938);
the manuscript is Aya Sofia 2052, fol. 535.
54. Stuart Gary Welch, "Islamic Art in the Metropolitan Museum," Metropolitan
Museum Bulletin,  1972, p. 291.

--- Page 360 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 337
can be observed. The case of Yeni  Yunus Emre,  the "New Yunus
Emre," seems to shed some light on this phenomenon. Ismail Emre
(d. 1973) is a blacksmith from Adana who can read no more than
a few words.55 Since 1940 he has produced a large number of mys-
tical songs in traditional forms, which he recites in a state of trance.
During the so-called "birth" (dogus)  of two of these songs in an
unheated car between Ankara and Konya in December 1958, when
the temperature outside was about 25 degrees Fahrenheit (—3 de-
grees centigrade), the inner heat of the singing mystic warmed up
the car to such an extent that the windows became fogged and those
of us traveling with him felt no discomfort from the cold through-
out the last hour of our journey. Cases of automatic writing are
known from different levels of Turkish society; the contents vary
according to the intellectual level of the recipients, who, however,
proved capable of jotting down verses in languages not even known
to them (like Persian).56
It is typical of the development in Turkey that after the closing
of the dervish orders in 1925, the former mystical tradition, at least
on the higher strata of society, sometimes merged into spiritualism
and was cultivated in spiritualist seances.
One should also not overlook another unexpected development
of Turkish popular mysticism. Gershom Scholem has shown that
the outwardly Islamized Jewish converts, the donme  (the followers
of Sabbatay Zwi in the seventeenth century), had close connections
with mystical groups and used Sufi poetry in their meetings.57
Yunus Emre and Kaygusuz Abdal are among the foremost mas-
ters of Bektashi poetry as it developed in Anatolia from the four-
teenth century. And a treatise attributed to Kaygusuz Abdal is one
of the major religious books of this order. Bektashi poetry has main-
tained, in most cases, the popular syllable-counting meters. Some
of the touching and appealing verses in this tradition are remark-
able for their comparatively fresh imagery, though they show a
somewhat "peasantish" crudity, which now and then contrasts not
unfavorably with the overrefined classical Turkish court poetry.
55. Ismail Emre, Yeni  Yunus Emre ve Dogu§lan  (Istanbul, 1951); Ismail Emre,
Dogu§lar 2 (Adana, 1965).
56. Two examples are Turgut Akka§, Ozkaynak  (Ankara, 1957), a collection of "in-
spired" poems, some of which had been published previously in his journal Ifvarhk;
and Omer Fevzi Mardin, Varidat-i  Suleyman  §erhi  (Istanbul, 1951), a commentary
by a noted modern mystic on the "inspired" poems of a Turkish civil servant.
57. See Gershom Scholem, "Die krypto-jiidische Sekte der Donme (Sabbatianer) in
der Tiirkei," Numen  7, no. i (1960).

--- Page 361 ---
338 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
Muhammad, CAH, and the twelve Imams of Shia Islam figure promi-
nently in this literature, as in the whole fabric of Bektashi thought,
in which Allah, Muhammad, and CA1I even constitute a sort of trin-
ity. The Bektashis have always maintained strong relations with the
Imamiya-Shia in Iran. The founder of the Safawid rule in Iran, and
thus the archenemy of the Ottomans, Shah Ismail (d. 1524), is even
regarded by the Bektashis as one of their own leading poets. He
wrote in Turkish (at a time when the Ottoman sultan Selirn Yavuz
wrote in Persian!), and the poetry that he composed under the pen
name Khata3! is in fact very much in tune with traditional Bektashi
verses.58
One of the few major poets in this line was Plr Sultan Abdal, who
was executed in Sivas about 1560 because of alleged treasonous re-
lations with the Persian Safawids.59 Pir Sultan's imagery was in-
spired by the austere landscape of the eastern Anatolian highlands:
the lover surfers in separation like the ewe that has lost her lamb;
he talks to the cranes that fly over the hills; the yellow mountain
flower in its modesty and patience resembles a perfect dervish. Like
so many Bektashi poets, Pir Sultan stands in the tradition of the
martyr-mystic Hallaj. In one poem he alludes to the rose that made
Hallaj sigh when his friend Shibli flung it at him, while the com-
mon people were throwing stones at him. Pir Sultan, imprisoned
by the Ottoman authorities, must have felt that the faithlessness of
his former friends hurt more than the enemies' attacks. His few
poems are outstanding models of Bektashi poetry at its best, a poetry
the results of which are often difficult to classify or even attribute
to this or that poet, since the imagery soon became as standardized
as the imagery of traditional court or learned poetry, the verse
forms allowing even less variation than the "classical" tradition did.
What kind of Sufis were these Bektashis, who inspired a long
line of popular Turkish poets, who were politically influential be-
cause of their long-standing relations with the Janissaries, and who
are still remembered for their jokes, which indicate their apparent-
ly rather antinomian way of life?60
The alleged founder of the order, Hajji Bektash, is said to have
58. Sadettin Niizhet Ergun, Bektasi  Edebiyati  Antolojisi  (Istanbul, 1944), gives a
good survey of the most famous poems.
59. Pir Sultan Abdal  (Istanbul, 1953).
60. John K. Birge, Th e Bektashi  Order of Dervishes  (1937; reprint ed., London,
1965), is the best study of this order, which was first studied in Europe by Georg Jacob,
in his Beitrdge  zur Kenntnis  des Derwisch-Ordens  der Bektaschis  (Berlin, 1908).

--- Page 362 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 339
come to Anatolia in the thirteenth century from Khurasan. The
date of his birth is given—typical of Bektashi thought—by the nu-
merical value of the word murawwat,  "virtue," which is 648/1247,
and his death is dated, by a similar device, in 738/1338. The tra-
ditions about his activities vary: the vildyetndmes,  books on saintli-
ness that favor miraculous evidence, speak of some of the miracles
he performed. The order, or fraternity, that crystallized around his
personality soon established relations with the military corps of
the Janissaries. From the fifteenth century on, Bektashi leaders
(bdba) lived close to the Janissary barracks to give spiritual guid-
ance to the soldiers. Thus they were, logically, involved in the fall
of the Janissaries in 1826, when this corps was uprooted because of
its increasingly destructive role in Ottoman society.
The order claims as its second master a certain Balim Sultan,
who was born about 1500 in Rumeli. The European part of the
Ottoman Empire was then apparently hospitable to Bektashi in-
fluences, and the order is still very much alive today in Albania,
where it was introduced prior to the seventeenth century.61
It seems that the Bektashiyya became a receptacle for all kinds of
non-Sunnite currents, though the Khurasanian spiritual chain of
Hajjl Bektash would have required a strict Sunnite ideology. How-
ever, not only did "normal" Shia ideas strongly permeate the tarlqa
and grow there into strange forms that are sometimes reminiscent
of popular developments of the Ismailiyya in India, but one of the
strangest offsprings of Shia thought, the Hurufls, had an influence
on the Bektashis. Fadlullah of Asterabad in Khurasan had received
a revelation according to which God was revealed in the word and
developed theories of kabbalistic speculations about the letters,
their values and their interior meaning (see Appendix i). The
greatest Hurufi poet, Neslml (who was flayed alive in Aleppo in
1417), has left a deep imprint upon Turkish poetry, with his glow-
ing and passionate mystical hymns. The Hurufi influence is visible
61. Hans Joachim Kissling, "Zur Frage der Anfange des Bektaschitums in Alba-
nien," Oriens  15 (1962); Kissling, "Zum islamischen Heiligenwesen auf dem Balkan,"
Zeitschrift fu r Balkanologie,  1963. Kissling and his students have contributed many
articles and books toward a better understanding of Turkish dervish orders. It is
worth noting that the influence of Sufism in the Balkans has even led to the develop-
ment of Serbo-Croatian mystical folk songs, as Hamid Algar has recently shown in his
fine article, "Some Notes on the Naqshbandi Tariqat in Bosnia," Di e Welt des Islam,
n.s. 13, nos, 3-4 (1971). See also B. G. Martin, "A Short History of the Khalwati Order
of Dervishes," in Scholars,  Saints, and Sufis: Muslim Religious  Institutions  since 1500,
ed. Nikki R. Keddie (Berkeley, 1972).

--- Page 363 ---
340 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
in the pictures that sometimes adorned Bektashi convents: the faces
of CAH, Hasan, and Husayn, or of others, are drawn by combining
the letters of their names.
In addition to the Shia trend, which is one of the peculiarities of
the Bektashi order, Christian influences have been seen in the ritual
(which would not be astonishing, in view of the strong Christian
substratum in Anatolia). There are, in fact, certain similarities,
like penitence or the sacramental meal of bread and wine, but one
should not press these similarities too far. The communal meal is
much older than the Christian sacrament. In modern, nationalistic
Turkish research, a certain "shamanist" aspect of Bektashism has
been emphasized; this would connect the order with old Turkish,
Central Asian forms of mystical life.
Many trends known from other mystical fraternities can be found
in the Bektashiyya as well. The Bektashis speak of the four gateways:
divine law, sharfa,  whose adherent is the c dbid, "worshiper"; the
mystical path, tarlqa,  traveled by the zdhid,  "ascetic"; the ma^rifa,
"gnosis," held by the ^drif,  "gnostic"; and the haqlqa,  "reality,'
which the muhibb,  "lover," reaches. Each of these four gateways
is founded upon ten obligations (very much like those taught
in other orders), and the sacred number of forty is attained once
more. The head of the order is the dede,  "grandfather," in the vil-
lage of Hacci Bektas, where a second leader, the Qelebi, used to
reside as well. The next position is that of the bdbd,  who is in charge
of teaching and of the pastoral work; bdbds  were located all over
the Ottoman Empire. The intermediate station is that of the dervish
who, like the bdbd,  may be married or lead a celibate life, and the
regular initiated member is called muhibb,  "lover."
The initiation ceremony is replete with symbolic acts, among
which the "hanging" of the initiate on the ddr-i  Mansur,  "the gal-
lows of Mansur Hallaj," plays a special role. Many c dshiq, "ardent
lovers," are affiliated with the order as lay members; they have not
taken their "part" (naslb]  in the initiation but are bound by loyalty
to the order. Certain peculiar prayer formulae are used, such as the
gulbdng and the tercemdn,  which contain Turkish prayers. Mu-
harram and New Year are celebrated in good Shia and Persian
form. On cAshura Day, the day of Husayn's martyrdom in Kerbela,
a special dish called c dsure is cooked; this reminds the pious of the
last meal of the martyrs of Kerbela, which were prepared from left-
overs. Even today many Turkish families—most of them non-

--- Page 364 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 341
Bektashis—prepare this sweetish, delicious dish on the tenth of
Muharram.
One of the outstanding features of the Bektashi order—unique
in Islam—is that women are treated as equals; they participate in
all ceremonies and freely converse with the men. This aspect of the
order has, of course, given rise to monstrous stories about the moral,
or rather immoral, life of the Bektashis—stories that are, in most
cases, greatly exaggerated. The fact that the Bektashis kept their
doctrines as secret as possible, especially after the extinction of the
Janissaries, has excited the imaginations of orthodox defenders of
the pure faith, as is the case with most secret societies.
In their theoretical approach, the Bektashis have added nothing
to the teachings of the Ibn cArabi school. They believe in the forty
degrees of descent and ascent, culminating in the Perfect Man. In
some of their best-known and most frequently recited poems
(devriye), they have tried to describe their participation in the
ascending circles of existence, which leads their poets to claim that
they are one with the great masters of all religions.
The problem of Bektashi practices was laid before the Turkish
intellectuals in 1922, when Yakup Kadri Karaosmanoglu published
his novel Nu r Baba.  The well-known Turkish diplomat and novel-
ist described in piquant details how a society lady from Istanbul
became involved in the order through an attractive young Bektashi
PIT, Nur Baba, "Father Light." Karaosmanoglu gave a good, though
highly satirical, introduction to some of its rituals, for instance, the
ayin-i cem,  the initiation ceremony. One may assume that Nu r
Baba was, at least to a certain extent, instrumental in convincing
Kemal Atatiirk of the necessity of abolishing the dervish orders.
However, one should not read Nu r Baba  without complementing
it with Yakup Kadri's small book Erenlerin  Bagindan,  "From the
Garden of the Wise," which contains twelve meditations in simple,
but highly refined and musical language, and which makes the
reader understand at least a few values of mystical life.62
Erenlerin Bagindan  reminds one of the works of the great masters
of Turkish mystical poetry who, throughout the centuries, tried to
console the people with their delicate, warm verses. Many of them
did not belong to the Bektashi order, but to other fraternities that
62. German translation of Nu r Baba  by Annemarie Schimmel, Flamme  und Falter
(Gummersbach, 1948); Schimmel, "Aus dem Garten der Weisen," in Da s Geisterhaus,
ed. Otto Spies (Kevelaer, 1949).

--- Page 365 ---
342 / THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE
had developed on Turkish soil in the course of time, growing,
splitting up into suborders, and covering the country in a wide-
spread network of centers of spirituality. We may think of Eshref-
oglu Rumi, a Qadirl mystic who lived in Iznik in the fifteenth
century and whose poems have often been sung in dervish com-
munities—simple verses, filled with allusions to mystical wine and
eternal love and always keeping the figure of Mansur Hallaj before
the eyes of his followers. Even though the following lines from his
Dlwdn were probably written not by himself but by one of his later
admirers, they are charming examples of Turkish dervish diction,
alluding to the custom of opening a sacred book for fortune-telling:
They had told me: "Do not read the book of love!"
"Look for an omen," I said—and this very page
opened again!
I ordered the tailor to make an ascetic's garment for me—
He did not keep to my word, and again a lover's
dress was cut.63
Niyazi Misri has already been mentioned as the commentator of
Yunus Emre's enigmatic poem. A leading member of the influential
Khalvetiyya order, he was a remarkable poet in his own right, re-
flecting in subtle verses the search of the soul and the peace that he
finally found after leaving himself and surrendering completely
to the beloved:
I thought that in the world no friend was left for me—
I left myself, and lo, no fiend was left for me.64
Even the Turkish rulers, defenders of orthodox Sunni Islam,
were sometimes inclined to mystical thought. The role of Aq Shams-
uddin in the life of Mehmet the Conqueror is well known; and
the frequently quoted poem of Sultan Murad III (d. 1595), who
wants "to awake from the sleep of heedlessness," shows the extent to
which Sufi terminology had been absorbed into the language even
of the highest circles, in spite of the strained relations between the
orthodox and the dervish orders that, from the time of Mehmet
the Conqueror, frequently resulted in friction and even political
63. William Hickman, "Eshrefoghlu Rumi: Reconstitution of His dlwdn"  (Ph.D.
diss., Harvard University, 1972), no. H 20*.
64. Niyazi Misri, Divan  (Istanbul, 1955).

--- Page 366 ---
THE ROSE AND THE NIGHTINGALE / 343
upheaval.65 The large masses remained under the influence of the
orders and found consolation in the simple songs and sermons of
the dervishes, and in verses like that of Ibrahim Haqqi Erzerumlu,
the eighteenth-century Sufi writer:
Gorelim Hak  ne eyler,
N'eylerse giizel  eyler.
Let us see what God will do-
Good is ev'rything He'll do.
This kind of unquestioning trust in God taught by the Sufis has to
a great extent shaped the faith of the population in the dazzling
capital of Istanbul and even more in the half-forgotten villages of
Anatolia. It has given them strength to endure the hardships of life.66
In the course of time, however, the institutions found themselves
unable to respond to the need for modernization and changed
outlook. Instead of fulfilling their centuries-old function as centers
of spiritual education, they became headquarters of obscurantism
and backwardness. That is why Atatiirk abolished the orders in
1925—3 step that some of the leading personalities in the mystical
hierarchy even approved of. They felt that the spiritual values of
Sufism as taught by the poets of Anatolia would survive without the
ruined framework of the orders—perhaps even in a more genuine
way. And these values are, indeed, still alive.
65. Franz Babinger, "Schejch Bedr ad-din, der Sohn der Richters von Simawna,"
Der Islam  2 (1912); Hans Joachim Kissling, "Das Menaqybname Scheich Bedr ad-
Dins," Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft  101 (1950).
66. A pleasant introduction is Nezihe Araz, Anadolu  Evliyalan  (Istanbul, 1958); for
other aspects of Turkish popular mysticism see Annemarie Schimmel, "Das Geliibde
im tiirkischen Volksglauben," Di e Welt des Islam,  n.s. 6, nos. 1-2 (1959).

--- Page 367 ---
8. SUFISM
IN INDO-PAKISTAN
THE CLASSICAL PERIOD
The western provinces of the Indo-Pakistan Subconti-
nent had become part of the Muslim Empire in 711, the year in
which the Arabs conquered Sind and the adjacent provinces north-
ward up to Multan.1 The Muslim pious in these areas were, in the
early centuries, apparently interested mainly in the collection of
hadlth and in the transmission to the central Muslim countries of
scientific information from India (mathematics, the "Arabic" num-
bers, astronomy and astrology, medicine), but their religious feel-
i. General surveys of the cultural life of Muslim India contain much information
about mystical trends. See, for example, Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi, Th e Muslim  Com-
munity o f the Indo-Pakistan  Subcontinent  (The Hague, 1962), from a strict Pakistani
viewpoint; Mohammed Mujeeb, Th e Indian Muslims  (Montreal and London, 1969),
from an Indian standpoint; Aziz Ahmad, Studies  in Islamic Culture in the Indian En-
vironment (Oxford, 1964); Aziz Ahmad, A n Intellectual  History of Islam in India
(Edinburgh, 1969); Yusuf Husain, L'Inde  mystique  au moyen age (Paris, 1929); Yusuf
Husain, Glimpses  of Medieval  Indian Culture,  2d ed. (London, 1959). An extensive
bibliography is D. N. Marshall, Mughals  in India: A Bibliography  (Bombay, 1967).
Zubaid Ahmad, Th e Contribution  of Indo-Pakistan  to Arabic Literature,  2d. ed. (La-
hore, 1968), contains many mystical works; Alessandro Bausani, Storia  delle letterature
del Pakistan  (Milan, 1958), gives a good survey of high and popular literatures; Anne-
marie Schimmel, "The Influence of Sufism on Indo-Muslim Poetry," in Anagogic
Qualities o f Literature,  ed. Joseph P. Strelka (University Park, Pa., 1971).
344

--- Page 368 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 345
ings may sometimes have reached the heights of mystical experience.
Spiritual contacts between the Muslims and the small Buddhist
minority, as well as with the large group of Hindus (who were
slightly outside the main current of orthodox Hinduism), may
have existed, though earlier European theories that tried to ex-
plain Sufism as an Islamized form of Vedanta philosophy or of
Yoga have now been discarded. In 905, a mystic like Hallaj traveled
extensively throughout Sind and probably discussed theological
problems with the sages of this country.2
The second wave of Muslim conquest in India, that of the Ghaz-
nawids about the year 1000, brought into the Subcontinent not
only scholars like al-BIruni (d. 1048), who made a careful study of
Hindu philosophy and life, but theologians and poets as well. La-
hore became the first center of Persian-inspired Muslim culture
in the Subcontinent—the name of Hujwirl, who composed his fa-
mous Persian treatise on Sufism in this town, has already been men-
tioned; his tomb still provides a place of pilgrimage for the
Panjabis.
The full impact of Sufism, however, began to be felt in the late
twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, after the consolidation of
the main Sufi orders in the central provinces of Islam. The most
outstanding representative of this movement is Mucmuddin Chish-
ti, born in Sistan and part-time disciple of Abu Najib Suhrawardi.
He reached Delhi in i igg,3 then settled in Ajmer, when the Delhi
kings conquered this important city in the heart of Rajputana. His
dwelling place soon became a nucleus for the Islamization of the
central and southern parts of India. The Chishti order spread
rapidly, and conversions in India during that period were due
mainly to the untiring activity of the Chishti saints, whose simple
and unsophisticated preaching and practice of love of God and
one's neighbor impressed many Hindus, particularly those from
the lower castes, and even members of the scheduled castes. The
fact that the Chishti khdnqdhs  avoided any discrimination between
the disciples and practiced a classless society attracted many people
into their fold. Mucinuddm reduced his teaching to three princi-
ples, which had been formulated first by Bayezld Bistami (T i: 164):
2. For a modern approach to mysticism by an Indian Muslim see Syed Vahiduddin,
Indisch-Moslemische Werterlebnisse  (Leipzig, 1937).
3. Zahur U. Sharib, Th e Life and Teachings  of Khawaja  Moinud-din  Hasan Chishti
(Ajmer, India, 1959). Mirza Wahiduddin Begg, Th e Holy Biography  of Hazrat Khwaja
Muinaddin Chishti  (Ajmer, 1960). A scholarly study of Mucinuddin is still needed.

--- Page 369 ---
346 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
a Sufi should possess "a generosity like that of the ocean, a mildness
like that of the sun, and a modesty like that of the earth." Although
the type of the soldier-Sufi, the fighter for the true religion, is some-
times found in the frontier provinces of India, as it is in other
border areas between Islam and the land of the infidels,4 the Is-
lamization of the country was achieved largely by the preaching of
the dervishes, not by the sword.3
When Mucmuddm died in 1236—not far from the beautiful
mosque Qutbuddm Aybek of Delhi had erected in Ajmer—he was
succeeded by a large number of khalifas,  who made his ideals known
all over India. To a certain extent, the sphere of influence of a
khalifa was designated by the master, who determined the areas
where the baraka  of this or that disciple should become active—a
territorial distribution of spiritual power frequently found in In-
dian Sufism.
Even today the tomb of Qutbuddm Bakhtiyar Kaki from Far-
ghana, who came to India together with Mucmuddm, is frequently
visited. This saint, who died in 1235, was highly venerated by
Iltutmish, the first king of the Slave Dynasty of Delhi, and the rather
modest compound in Merauli near the Qutb Minar in Delhi is
usually filled with pious pilgrims, who recite and sing their de-
votional poetry. The beautiful marble sanctuary of Mucmuddm
(erected by the Mogul Emperor Jihangir) is also still a center of
religious inspiration for thousands of faithful Muslims.
Bakhtiyar Kakl's successor was Fariduddm (d. 1265), but because
of the politically confused situation he left the capital and settled
in the Punjab on the river Sutlej.6 His home has been known, ever
since, as Pakpattan, "the ferry of the pure." Farid had been in-
fluenced in his early religious life by his pious mother. He per-
formed extremely difficult ascetic practices, among them the chilla
ma^kusa, hanging upside down in a well and performing the pre-
scribed prayers and recollections for forty days. His constant fasting
was miraculously rewarded—even pebbles turned into sugar, hence
4. Richard M. Eaton, "Sufis of Bijapur: Some Social Roles of Medieval Muslim
Saints" (Paper delivered at the Conference of South East Asian Studies, New York, 29
March 1972).
5. Sir Thomas Arnold, Th e Preaching  of Islam  (1896; reprint ed., Lahore, 1956); see
the same author's "Saints, Muhammadan, in India," in Encyclopedia  of Religion  and
Ethics, ed. James Hastings, 13 vols. (1908-27), 11:68-73, the most illuminating short
survey of the subject.
6. Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, Th e Life and Times of Shaikh Farid Ganj-i Shakar  (Ali-
garh, 1955), gives a good introduction to the problems.

--- Page 370 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 347
his surname Ganj-i  shakar,  "sugar treasure." Whether this charm-
ing legend is true or not, it shows the extreme importance Farid
placed on ascetic exercises, and we may well believe that "no saint
excelled him in his devotions and penances." Even his family
life suffered under the restrictions he placed upon himself. He did
not care for his wives or children, eight of whom survived. When
he was informed that a child had died—so legend has it—he said:
"If fate has so decreed and he dies, tie a rope around his feet and
throw him out and come back!" This tradition reminds the his-
torian of the attitude of some of the early ascetics, who rejoiced
at the death of their family members. But as a consequence of this
inhuman attitude, most sons of early Chishti saints turned out to be
worldly people, some even drunkards, who had no disposition at
all for the religious, let alone mystical, life.7
The maintenance of Farlduddm's khdnqah—and  he is mentioned
here as an outstanding example of the early Chishti way of life-
was difficult, since the sheikh relied exclusively upon gifts (futuh],
and the khdnqah  did not own or cultivate land from which the
dervishes might draw their living. No jdgirs  (endowments of land)
or grants from the rulers were accepted by the Chishtis, for they
refused to deal with the worldly government. One of their poets
said:
How long will you go to the doors of Amirs and sultans?
This is nothing else than walking in the traces of Satan.
This mistrust of government, familiar from early Sufi literature,
became more outspoken with these Chishti saints, who considered
everything in the hands of the rulers to be unlawful.
The dervishes in the khdnqah  regarded themselves as "guests of
God," living and working in one large room; visitors were always
welcome, and the table always spread for unexpected guests—if
there was any food available. The residents had to serve the sheikh
and the community, and their main occupations were prayer, wor-
ship, and the study of books of devotion and the biographies of
saints. Farlduddm and his fellow saints in the order, however,
7. Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, Some  Aspects of Religion  and Politics  in India during
the rjth Century  (Bombay, 1961), p. 204; Nizami, "Some Aspects of Khanqah Life in
Medieval India," Studia  Islamica  8 (1957). Nizami has published numerous books and
articles, both in English and in Urdu, on medieval Indian intellectual history. He
has also edited the Khayr  al-majalis,  by Chiragh-i Dehlawi (Aligarh, 1959), one of the
most important sources for early Chishti life.

--- Page 371 ---
348 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
recommended a good education for the disciples and were interested
in poetry and music. It is possible that Fariduddm composed a few
lines of poetry in the local dialect, which would place him in the
chain of those mystics who helped disseminate Sufi teachings in
popular songs, thus influencing the population, particularly the
women, who used to sing these simple verses while doing their
daily work.
Fariduddm invested seven khalifas  with spiritual power; among
his disciples, Jamal Hanswi and Nizamuddin must be counted as
his special friends. The poet Jamal Hanswi (d. 1260) wrote moving
mystical songs in Persian—unsophisticated and sometimes slightly
didactic, but attractive. Fariduddm's outstanding khalifa,  however,
was Nizamuddm, whom he met in 1257, only a few years before
his death.
Nizamuddm was one of the well-known theologians of Delhi;
then, with his master, he studied Suhrawardi's cAwdrif al-macdrif,
the guidebook of almost all the Indo-Muslim mystics in the thir-
teenth and fourteenth centuries. After his third visit to Pakpattan,
he was appointed khalifa  in Delhi. The name of Nizamuddm
Auliya3, "Saints," as he came to be known out of respect, marks the
high tide of mystical life in Delhi. The saint was a strict follower of
the Prophetic sunna,  a student of and commentator on the Prophetic
traditions, and, at the same time, a friend of poets and musicians.
Barani, the Indo-Muslim historiographer of the early fourteenth
century, claims that it was Nizamuddm's influence that inclined
most of the Muslims in Delhi toward mysticism and prayers, to-
ward remaining aloof from the world. Books on devotion were fre-
quently sold. No wine, gambling, or usury was to be found in Delhi,
and people even refrained from telling lies. It became almost fash-
ionable, if we are to believe Barani, to purchase copies of the fol-
lowing books: Makkl's Qut  al-qulub  and, quite logically, Ghaz-
zalfs Ihya? ^ulum ad-din; Suhrawardi's CAwdrif al-macdrif and
Hujwiri's Kashf  al-mahjub;  Kalabadhi's Kitdb  at-tacarruf and its
commentary; and the Risdla  of Qushayri. Also in Barani's list are
Najmuddm Daya's Mirsdd  ul-^ibdd,  the letters of cAynu3l-Qudat
Hamadhani, and, the only book written by an Indian Muslim,
Hamiduddm N agon's Lawdmf,  a treatise by one of the early Chish-
ti saints (d. 1274) noted for his poverty and his vegetarianism. These
books may have given succor to the population in the confused

--- Page 372 ---
,
A saint with his tame lions,
Indian, early  seventeenth  century.
Staatliche Museen,  East Berlin

--- Page 373 ---
35O / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
political situation. Nizamuddm Auliya (d. 1325), tenderly called by
his followers Mahbub-i  ildhl,  "God's beloved,"8 outlived seven
kings, and constant intrigues, bloodshed, and rebellions took place
in Delhi and its environs during his life.
During Nizamuddm's time, Sufism became a mass movement
in northwestern India, and the moral principles laid down by the
early Chishti saints did much to shape the ideals of the Muslim
society in that part of the Subcontinent. A number of Punjabi
tribes still claim to have been converted by Fariduddln Ganj-i
Shakar.
Close to Nizamuddm's tomb in Delhi—still the most frequently
visited sanctuary in Delhi—is the tomb of his closest friend and
disciple, Amir Khosrau (1254-1325), the best-known poet of the
early Muslim period in India. Versatile and witty, he composed
lyrics and epics, historical poetical novels, and treatises on episto-
lography, but almost no mystical poetry. He was, however, the
founder of the Indo-Muslim musical tradition; he was a composer
and a theoretician, and this talent of his certainly developed in
connection with his Chishti affiliation. Austere as they were in
their preparatory stage of life, the Chishtiyya allowed the samcf,
the spiritual concert and dance; this predilection is reflected in
many of their sayings and in their poetry. They have contributed
a great deal to the development of the Indo-Muslim musical tradi-
tion, of which Amir Khosrau—lovingly styled "the parrot of India"
and "God's Turk"—was the first great representative.
Khosrau's friend Hasan Sijzl Dihlawl (d. 1328)—the disciple of
Nizamuddm who collected his master's sayings—is less well known
as a poet, but his verses convey more of the truly mystical spirit than
Khosrau's. They are winsome in their lyrical wording, replete with
love and tender emotion. About the same time, a beautiful poem in
honor of the Prophet Muhammad was composed by a third poet of
the Chishtiyya, Bu CA1I Qalandar PanipatI (d. 1323), whose verses
8. See the lovely story in Ahmad Ali, Twilight  in Delhi  (Oxford, 1966), p. 146, in
which a pious inhabitant of Delhi tries to explain the breakdown of Indo-Muslim
glory as a result of acting against Nizamuddm's spirit: "The real causes of the loss of
the Mughal Empire were some mistakes committed by the elders of that king, and
the biggest of them all was that they had separated lover and beloved from each other
by burying Mohammad Shah between the graves of Hazrat Mahboob Elahi and Hazrat
Amir Khusro. . . ." Indeed, one of the most artistic poems by Amir Khosrau (who
often praised his master Nizamuddin) is the ghazal no. 291 in his Diwan-i  Kdmil,  ed.
Mahmud Derwish (Tehran, 1343 sh./ig64), in which the master is praised as the one
"through whose existence the world is kept alive in the same manner as the forms
are kept alive by the spirit."

--- Page 374 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 35!
were the first of the many eulogies for the Prophet written in the
Subcontinent. The same mystic who wrote charming lines about
the all-embracing power of love—"Were there not love and the
grief of love—who would say, who would hear so many sweet words?"
(AP 112)—wrote some remarkable letters to the Delhi kings criti-
cizing their way of life.
From Nizamuddin Auliya the spiritual chain goes to Chiragh-i
Dehli, the "Lamp of Dehli" (d. 1356) and then to Muhammad
Gisudaraz, "he with the long tresses," who migrated to the Deccan
and enjoyed the patronage of the Bahmani Sultans. This saint, who
died in 1422 and is buried in Gulbarga near present-day Hy-
derabad, was a prolific writer of both poetry and prose in Arabic
and Persian. He also composed a book on the Prophet of Islam,
Mfraj al- cdshiqm, for the instruction of the masses, in Dakhni, the
southern branch of Urdu. He was the first Sufi to use this ver-
nacular, which was elaborated upon by many other saints in south-
ern India in the next two centuries. Gisudaraz was probably the
first author in the Subcontinent who tried to introduce the classical
works of Sufism on a broad scale; he commented upon Ibn cArabi's
Fusus al-hikam  as well as upon Suhrawardl's Addb  al-muridm  and
wrote numerous treatises and books on mystical life and on Pro-
phetic traditions. Thanks to him, both the refined love mysticism of
cAynuDl-Qudat's Tamhlddt  and the fundamental work of Ibn cArabi
were made accessible to Indian Sufis and came to influence the
development of mystical thought in later centuries. GIsudaraz's
Persian poetry gracefully translates the feelings of his loving heart-
intoxicated by divine love, he feels himself to be beyond separation
and union. The true lovers, who quaffed the wine of love at the
Day of the Covenant,
are the first page (dibaja]  of the book of existence
and have become the preeternal title of endless eternity.
(AP 152)
The Chishtiyya remained for centuries the most influential order
in the Subcontinent, but it never went beyond its borders.
Another important order was the Suhrawardiyya, the tradition
from which Mucinuddm Chishti had drawn his first inspiration.
Several of Abu Hafs cUmar Suhrawardl's disciples reached India at
the beginning of the thirteenth century. Among them was Jalalud-
dm Tabriz!, who went to Bengal, where he died in 1244. The order

--- Page 375 ---
352 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
still flourishes in this area and has produced a number of mystics
and political figures among the Bengali Muslims.
An even greater Suhrawardiyya impact on Muslim religious life
was made by Baha°uddin Zakariya Multam (d. ca. 1262), a con-
temporary of Farlduddin Ganj-i Shakar. It is revealing to compare
the style of life of these two mystics, who were separated by only
a few hundred miles—the stern ascetic Farid, who gave no thought
to any worldly needs and refused all governmental grants for his
family and his disciples, and the well-to-do landlord BahaDuddin,
who looked after the needs of his family and never failed to keep
a supply of grain in his house. His accumulation of wealth was
sufficient to make him the target of accusations by other Sufis, but
his sons, unlike the sons of most of the early Chishtl saints, fol-
lowed in his path; the succession in the Suhrawardiyya became,
generally, hereditary. As opposed to the open table in the poor
Chishti khanqahs,  Baha3uddin was more formal and had fixed
hours for visitors who were invited to partake in meals. And he
was willing to mix freely with members of the ruling classes-
just as Abu Hafs cUmar SuhrawardI himself had served the caliph
an-Nasir.9 This contrasting attitude toward the world, and toward
its most dangerous representative, the government, has survived
through the centuries. It is interesting to compare the theories of
the sixteenth-century Egyptian mystic Shacrani about the relations
between the Sufis and the government with the utterances of the
Indian saints of either tradition.
It may be that BahaDuddm Zakariya would not have been so well
known if a noted love poet had not lived in his entourage for nearly
twenty-five years. This poet was Fakhruddm clraqi (d. i28g).10 He
had fallen in love with a certain youth and had followed him and
a group of dervishes who went to India. In Multan he attached
himself to Baha°uddin, to whom he dedicated some impressive
qasidas. The story goes:
The saint set him in a cell. For ten days clraqi sat therein admitting
nobody. On the eleventh day, overcome by his emotion, he wept aloud
and sang:
The wine wherewith the cup they first filled high,
was borrowed from the sdqi's  languorous eye.
9. Aziz Ahmad, "The Sufi and the Sultan in Pre-Mughal Muslim India," De r Islam
38 (1963)-10. Fakhruddm clraql, Dtivdn,  ed. Sacid Naflsl (Tehran, 1338 sh./igsg); clraqi, Th e
Song of the Lovers ('Ushshaqndme),  ed. and trans. A. J. Arberry (Oxford, 1939).

--- Page 376 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 353
The inmates of the hospice ran and told the saint what was passing.
Now this order followed the rule of Shihabuddm Suhrawardi whose
favoured pupil BahaDuddm was, and Suhrawardi's rule was that the
devotee should occupy himself only with the recitation of the Koran
and the expounding of tradition. The other brothers therefore viewed
clraqi's behavior with disapproval, and complained to the saint. He
however replied that this was prohibited to them, but not to him.
Some days later, clmaduddin, passing through the bazaar, observed
that this poem was being recited to the accompaniment of music. Visit-
ing the taverns he found the same thing there. On his return, he re-
ported this to the saint recounting what he had heard as far as the lines:
Why should they seek to hurt Iraqi's fame,
since they themselves their secrets thus proclaim!
"His affair is complete," said the saint, and arising he went to the
door of clraqi's cell.
"clraqi,"he called, "do you make your prayers in taverns? Come forth!"
The poet came out of his cell, and laid his head at the saint's feet,
weeping. The latter raised his head from the ground, and would not
suffer him to return to his cell, but taking off the mystic robe set it upon
him.11
BahaDuddm, with the spiritual insight of a true saint, acknowledged
Iraqi's greatness and true love. The tender and intoxicating love
poems that the Persian poet composed are still being sung by Pakis-
tani musicians at the door of the master's tomb in Multan.
clraqfs poetic interpretation of a classic Arabic verse about the
wine and the glass, indistinguishable in the light of the sun, is one
of the favorite quotations of later Sufis:
Cups are those a-flashing with wine,
Or suns through the clouds a-gleaming?
So clear is the wine and the glass so fine,
that the two are one in seeming.
The glass is all and the wine is naughted,
Or the glass is naught and the wine is all.12
For the history of Sufi thought, his Lama cdt, "Flashes," inspired
by Ibn cArabI's theories, are highly important. He dealt in the
traditional Persian form of mixed poetry and prose with a number
of problems of mystical life in general and of his own life in par-
ticular: with love revealed through the medium of human beauty.
For clraqi, love is the only thing existing in the world (lanfa 7),
and lover, beloved, and love are one—union and separation no
11. clraql, Song  of the Lovers,  no. 15; cf. N 602.
12. Edward G. Browne, A  Literary History of Persia,  4 vols. (1902; reprint ed., Cam-
bridge, 1957), 3:130.

--- Page 377 ---
354 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
longer pertain (larrfa  2). The light of the cheek of the beloved is
the first thing the eye sees, His voice the first thing the ear hears
(lamca 18), and the separation that the beloved wishes is a thou-
sand times better and more beautiful than the union desired by the
lover (lanfa  22). Thus he goes beyond the early formulation that
love means staying at the friend's door even if sent away.
clraql sees God, the eternally beautiful beloved, everywhere and
is in love with everything the beloved does and orders. Why
should he himself wish anything? Heart and love are one; love some-
times grows out of the heart like flowers, and the whole world is
nothing but an echo of love's eternal song. Although the lover is
bound to secrecy, the beloved himself makes the secret of love mani-
fest. Why, then, was a lover like Hallaj punished for his disclosure
of the secret of divine love?
Soon after Baha°uddln Zakariya's death, clraqi left Multan for
Konya, where he met Sadruddin Qonawl and perhaps Jalaluddm
Ruml. clraqi is buried in Damascus, close to the grave of Ibn cArabi,
whose thoughts he had transformed poetically. Iraqi's influence on
later Persian and Indo-Persian poetry can scarcely be overrated;
the Lamcfat  were often commented upon, and JamI popularized his
thoughts.
In the history of the Suhrawardiyya in India the intensity of
clraql's experience, the splendor of his radiating love, has rarely
been repeated. One of Zakariya's disciples, Sayyid Jalaluddm
Surkhpush ("Red-dressed," d. 1292) from Bukhara, settled in
Ucch, northeast of Multan, and is the forefather of a long line of
devout mystics and theologians. Ucch was, for a while, the center of
the Suhrawardiyya, thanks chiefly to the active and pious Jalaluddm
Makhdum-i Jahaniyan, "whom all the inhabitants of the world
serve" (d. 1383), a prolific writer in almost all religious fields. It
was in Ucch that the first missionaries of the Qadiriyya settled in
the late fifteenth century; from there this order spread into the
Subcontinent, where it soon gained a firm footing and was carried
to Indonesia and Malaysia.13
Another aspect of mystical life developed in the same period dur-
ing which Mucmuddm Chishtl and Baha3uddm Zakariya were
preaching divine love and union: its representative is Lai Shahbaz,
13. A typical example of the spread of the Qadiriyya is given by Syed Muhammad
Naquib al-Attas, Th e Mysticism  of Hamza al-Fansuri  (Kuala Lumpur, 1970). This
mystic made the order popular in Malaysia.

--- Page 378 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 355
"the Red Falcon," Qalandar. From Marwand in Sistan, he was the
saint of Sehwan, who lived in the mid-thirteenth century in Sind, at
the site of the old Shiva sanctuary at the west bank of the lower
Indus. Lai Shahbaz was an intoxicated mystic who considered him-
self a member of the spiritual lineage of Hallaj, as some of his
Persian verses seem to show. Around his sanctuary strange groups of
bi-sharc, "lawless," Sufis (malang)  gathered, dressed in black, and
the mystical current connected with Sehwan often shows Sufism in
its least attractive aspects. The "fair" of Sehwan—celebrated be-
tween Shawwal 18 and 20—has become notorious for its rather
illicit events.14 A lingam  close to the actual tomb proves the Shivait
background of some of the rites.
The orders grew in India in the following centuries, and new
suborders emerged, among which the Shattariyya in the sixteenth
century deserves special mention. The main representative of this
order—which is restricted to India and Indonesia—was Muhammad
Ghauth Gwaliori (d. 1562), for whom Akbar built a magnificent
tomb. This Muhammad Ghauth is the author of an interesting book,
Al-jawdhir al-khamsa,  "The Five Jewels," which deals with man-
ners and practices of Sufism and also connects the meditation of the
most beautiful names with astrological ideas. This book deserves a
detailed study both in its original Persian and in its widely read
Arabic translation.15 Another member of the Shattariyya, Muham-
mad Ghauthi (d. after 1633), composed a voluminous work about
the Indo-Muslim, especially Gujrati, saints that contains biog-
raphies of 575 Sufis. As time passed, the mystics became ever more
preoccupied with collecting biographical notes and making com-
pilations of second- and often third-hand information.
The early Indian Sufis had already displayed an amazing literary
activity. Although the mystics often expressed their aversion to in-
tellectual scholarship and writing, most of them were quite eager to
14. Peter Mayne, Saints  of Sind  (London, 1956), gives a vivid and often ironical ac-
count of the customs of so-called saints; yet his brilliantly written book contains much
valuable information about little-known facts of saint worship and mystical thought
in the Indus Valley.
15. See Marshall, Mughals  in India,  no. 1169, and Zubaid Ahmad, Th e Contribution
of Indo-Pakistan,  pp. 940% Muhammad Ghauth's book has been very popular, as may
be understood from the number of commentaries on it. About some of the commen-
tators, and about Sufism in South Arabia as well as the relationships between Indian
mystics (mainly Naqshbandis) and the scholars and saints of Yemen and Hadramaut,
see the little-known, but very useful, study by Ferdinand Wiistenfeld, "Die (Jufhen in
Siid-Arabien im XI. (XVII) Jahrhumlert," Nachrichten  von der Gesellschaft  der
Wissenschaften zu  Gottingen,  Philologisch-historische  Klasse  30, no. i (1883).

--- Page 379 ---
356 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
put down their knowledge in books and treatises. In India, a special
literary genre became very popular—the so-called malfuzdt,  collec-
tions of sayings of the spiritual preceptors. This was not an Indian
invention—the classical handbooks of Sufism consist to a large ex-
tent of apothegmata and random sentences of the masters of old.
The Indian Sufis, however, carefully collected the dicta of their
masters from day to day, and, as Khaliq Ahmad Nizami has rightly
pointed out, these "diaries" constitute a valuable source for our
knowledge of life outside the court circles. They are a necessary cor-
rective of the official historiography; they allow us interesting
glimpses into social and cultural problems that the official authors
wittingly or unwittingly overlooked.
The first important example of this genre is the Fawa'id  al-fifdd,
Nizamuddin Auliya's conversations compiled between 1307 and
1322 by his disciple Amir Hasan Sijzl Dihlawi, the poet. Only after
a year had passed did he let his master know of his scheme. From
then on Nizamuddin himself helped him in filling the lacunae in
the manuscript. Most of the fourteenth-century mystics, whether
they lived in Delhi—like Chiragh-i Delhi (Khayr  al-majdlis)—or  set-
tled in central India—like the grandson of Hamlduddm Nagorl,
who compiled his ancestor's sentences (Suriir  as-sudur^—had  their
sayings recorded. In later times, collections of malfuzdt were fabri-
cated with more or less pious intent.16
Some other mystics set out to write histories of their orders. Mir
Khurd, a disciple of Nizamuddin and friend of Hasan Dihlawi, like
him and like many leading intellectuals of Delhi forced by Muham-
mad Tughluq to leave Delhi for the Deccan in 1327, felt guilty
about deserting his master's sanctuary, and, as expiation for this
impiety, he undertook to write a history of the Chishti order, the
Siyar al-auliya*.  This book is still the most trustworthy account of
the Chishti silsila  and of medieval Chishti khdnqdh  life.
Another literary activity was the writing of letters, partly private,
partly for circulation. The collections of the letters of Muslim In-
dian Sufis from the thirteenth century on are an extremely impor-
tant source of our knowledge of the age and movement and, as in
the case of Ahmad Sirhindl, have played a remarkable role even in
politics. Sufi thought permeated all fields of poetry, and even poets
who are classified primarily as court poets could reach mystical
16. For the whole problem see Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, "Malfuzat ki tarikhi aham-
miyat," in Arshi  Presentation  Volume,  ed. Malik Ram (Delhi, 1961).

--- Page 380 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 357
heights of expression. An example is Jamali Kanboh (d. 1535),
Iskandar Lodi's court poet, whose famous lines on the Prophet have
already been quoted (p. 221).
By the fourteenth century, the works of Sufis of the classical pe-
riod were being continuously read and explained. Though the in-
terest was at first concentrated upon the representatives of moderate
Sufism, the theosophy of Ibn cArabI and his disciples soon became
popular in India. The number of commentaries written on the
Fusus al-hikam,  and the number of books that were composed to
explain the theories of the Great Master, are myriad. From the late
fifteenth century on, Ibn cArabi's ideas became influential every-
where. Iraqi's and Jaml's poetry, which were a poetical elaboration
of these ideas, made them even more popular, since many people
who would not read theoretical Sufi works certainly enjoyed these
lovely poems. The name of cAbdu:l-Quddus Gangohi (d. 1538), a
leading saint and prolific writer, is an outstanding example of Su-
fism tinged by the theories of the wahdat  al-wujud.  It should, how-
ever, be emphasized that cAbduDl-Quddus strictly observed the Mus-
lim law, as did most of the influential spiritual preceptors.17
Under the influence of the theory of "Unity of Being," some
mystics might see points of correspondence between Sufi thought
and the Vedanta system of Hindu philosophy and attempt to bring
about an approximation between Muslim and Hindu thought—a
current that was viewed with great distrust by the orthodox.
The question of the probability and extent of mutual influences
of Muslim and Hindu mysticism has been discussed often by Orien-
tal and Western scholars. India had, indeed, been known as the
country of magical practices—Hallaj even went there "in order to
learn magic," according to his detractors. It is small wonder, then,
that Sufi hagiography in India describes magic-working contests be-
tween Sufi saints and yogis or mysterious conversions of Indian yogis
by Sufis.18 The Muslim saints and theologians discussed the ques-
tion of the extent to which the experiences of the yogis were real, or
whether they relied upon a satanic, or at least a magical, basis. They
would usually admit the possibility of certain miracles performed
17. Icjazul Haqq Quddusi, ^Abdul  Quddus  Gangohi  (Karachi, 1961). cAbdu-'l-
Quddus's Rushdname,  in which Hindi poetry is inserted and which seems to be in-
fluenced by Hindu thought, still deserves careful study. Khaja Khan, Studies  in Tasaw-
wuf (Madras, 1923), contains an appendix, "Sufi Orders in the Deccan," which is fairly
useful.
18. Simon Digby, "Encounters with Jogis in Indian Sufi Hagiography," mimeo-
graphed, School of Oriental and African Studies (London, 1970).

--- Page 381 ---
358 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
by the yogis but would maintain the importance of following the
Islamic Path for the performance of true miracles. The shan ca is the
divine secret, as Glsudaraz said, and as late as the eighteenth cen-
tury the view was expounded that even the greatest ascetic practices
and the resulting miracles of a yogi could not properly be compared
to even the smallest sign of divine grace manifested in a faithful
Muslim.
Another question has to do with the extent to which the ascetic
practices of Indo-Muslim saints developed under the influence of
Yoga practices. It has been claimed that the strict vegetarianism of
some of the Indian Sufis, like Hamiduddm Nagori and others,
might be attributed to contact with Hindu ascetics. But a story about
Rabica al-cAdawiyya told by cAttar (T 1:64) makes it clear that this
saint was credited with complete abstinence from animal products
so that the animals no longer fled from her. Similar legends are told
of North African saints, and from very early times some ascetics
even avoided killing insects—a trend found in the Maghreb as well,
where no Hindu or Jain influence can possibly have been present.19
To what extent the breath control advocated by early Sufis in
their dhikr  developed under the influence of Indian practices can-
not be judged properly. It existed, like the "inverted chillah,"
among the Sufis of eastern Iran before Sufism spread to India. For
the later period, however, we may assume that a deepened interest
in the ascetic practices of their Hindu neighbors might have colored
some aspects of Indian Sufi life. Some theoretical works about Yoga
practices were composed by Indo-Muslim scholars, and a few out-
standing Sanskrit works in this field were translated into Persian
during the Mogul period.20
On the whole, the boundaries between Muslim and Hindu saints
remained quite well defined during the first five centuries of Mus-
lim rule over large parts of India, though there were syncretistic
movements, like that of Kabir in the fifteenth century. The situa-
tion changed somewhat with the arrival of the Moguls in India. Ba-
bur, from the dynasty of Timur, who established the rule of his
house over northwestern India with the decisive Battle of Panipat
in 1526, was accustomed to showing reverence to the Sufis in his
19. £mile Dermenghem, L e culte des saints dans I'lslam Maghrebin  (Paris, 1954),
p. 100.
20. Aziz Ahmad, "Sufismus und Hindumystik," Saeculum  15, no. i (1964). See also
Hellmut Ritter, "Al-Biruni's iibersetzung des Yoga-Sutra des Patanjali," Oriens  9
(!956)-

--- Page 382 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 359
Central Asian homeland. In his lively and informative Turkish
memoirs he tells some interesting stories about the connections be-
tween the Timurid princes and some of the mystical leaders of
Central Asia. The influence of the Naqshbandiyya on Central Asian
politics in the late fifteenth century and after will be discussed later.
Babur himself translated into Turkish the Risdla-yi  wdlidiyya  of
cUbaydullah Ahrar, the leading Naqshbandi master of Central Asia
(d. 1490), and in one of his poems called himself "the servant of the
dervishes." After his arrival in India, Babur turned his interest to
the Chishti order, which in the following decades became closely
connected with the Mogul house.
It was Babur's grandson Akbar (1556-1605) who, during the half
century of his reign, tried to establish a religious eclecticism in
which the best elements of all religions known to him would be
contained. It seems that his ideas were, to some degree, influenced
by the teaching of the Mahdawiyya, the chiliastic movement of
Muhammad of Jaunpur, who at the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury had declared himself to be the promised Mahdi.21 Akbar's two
most faithful friends, the court poet Fayzi and the historiographer
AbuDl-Fazl, were the sons of a mystic connected with the Mahdi
movement; thus an influence cannot be completely excluded. The
ideal of a golden age and restoration of peace all over the world, so
typical of chiliastic movements, was in Akbar's mind, and the "lying
together of the lamb and the lion" in the peaceful reign of the
Moguls was often represented in Mogul painting of the early seven-
teenth century.22 Akbar's religious tolerance was, in its practical
consequences, scarcely compatible with Muslim law, and the ortho-
dox became highly suspicious of the din-i  ildhi,  the Divine Religion
invented by the Emperor. Badauni's chronicle reflects the unalloyed
hatred of the orthodox theologian who, because of his talents, had
been one of the leading translators at Akbar's court and was forced
to translate into Persian "the books of the infidels," i.e., the Sanskrit
21. See A. S. Bazmee Ansari, "Sayyid Muhammad Jawnpuri and His Movement,"
Islamic Studies  2 (1963).
22. See Richard Ettinghausen, "The Emperor's Choice," Festschrift  E. Panofsky
(New York, 1961); Emmy Wellecz, Akbar's  Religious  Thought  as Reflected  in Moghul
Painting (London, 1952). The "drinking together of the wolf and the lamb," inherited
from Old Testament prophecies, occurs as a sign of the ruler's perfect justice in early
Ismaili propaganda; see Tilman Nagel, Friihe  Ismailiya  und Fatimiden  im Lichte  der
risdlat iftitdh  ad-da'-wa  (Bonn, 1972), p. 14. It also forms part of Rumi's imagery, in
which it is applied to the mystical beloved, under whose spell the differences between
men and animals disappear.

--- Page 383 ---
360 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
epics that were at such variance with the monotheistic ideals of the
basically exclusive Muslim mind.
Akbar's attempts could not bring forth a perfect solution of the
problems confronting a large, multireligious country; on the con-
trary, they evoked much resistance in all segments of the population.
Yet they are reflected in the poetry and the fine arts of his time. Per-
sian poetry written at the Mogul court and throughout Muslim
India, including Bengal, was dominated by the imagery developed
in Iran—most of the leading poets between 1570 and 1650, in fact,
came from Iran. Their verses revealed the same mystical feeling as
the best poems of their motherland. The constant oscillation be-
tween worldly and divine love, the symbolism of roses and nightin-
gales continued; now the vocabulary was enriched by allegorical
stories from Indian sources and allusions to the newly discovered
European world. But the general tenor of poetry remained by and
large the same: endless longing for a beloved who can never be
reached, unless the lover undertakes very difficult tasks and gladly
offers his life on the thorny path toward the eternal goal. The nos-
talgia and melancholy so often found in classical Persian poetry was
more pronounced in India, hidden under a dazzling exterior, and
the later Mogul period once more produced great and truly touch-
ing mystical poetry.
It was in the house of a Chishti saint that Akbar's heir apparent
Salim, whose throne name was Jihangir, was born. In gratitude for
the blessings of this saint, Akbar erected a wonderful Sufi dargdh  in
his new capital Fathpur Sikri. When Jihangir grew up, he adorned
Ajmer, Mucmuddm Chishti's city, with beautiful buildings of
white marble. The close association of the Chishtiyya with the
Moguls, so alien to their previous antigovernment attitude, is re-
flected in many stories about Akbar and his successors.
The mystical movement aiming at the unification of Hindu and
Muslim thought, inaugurated by Akbar, reached its culmination
in the days of Dara Shikoh (1615-59), his great-grandson, the heir
apparent of the Mogul Empire.23 This talented prince was the first-
born son of Shah Jihan and Mumtaz Mahal, whose monumental
23. Kalika-Ranjan Qanungo, Dara  Shukoh  (Calcutta, 1935); Bikrama Jit Hasrat,
Dara Shikuh:  Life and Works  (Calcutta, 1953). Many of Dara Shikoh's works have
been edited and translated; see Louis Massignon and Clemens Huart, eds., "Les entre-
tiens de Lahore," Journal  asiatique  209 (1926); and Louis Massignon and A. M. Kas-
sim, "Un essai de bloc islamo-hindou au XVII siecle: 1'humanisme mystique du Prince
Dara," Revue  du monde  musulman  63 (1926).

--- Page 384 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 361
tomb, the Taj Mahal, symbolizes the ruler's deep love for the
mother of his fourteen children. Dara became interested in mystical
thought very early. It was not the "official" Chishtl order to which
he was attracted, but rather the Qadiriyya, represented in Lahore
by Mian Mir, who had come there from Sind, together with his
mystically inclined sister BIbi Jamal. Mian Mir's disciple and suc-
cessor, Molla Shah Badakhshi, introduced the prince to the saint.
Instead of involving himself actively in politics and military affairs,
Dara indulged in literary activities, to say nothing of his exquisite
calligraphy. Widely read in classical works of Sufism, including
Ruzbihan Baqli's writings, he showed ready ability at compiling
biographical studies on the earlier Sufis and collecting their say-
ings (Hasanat  al-^drifm}.  The Saklnat  al-auliya 3 is a fine biography
of Mian Mir and the Qadiriyya in Lahore. The admiration with
which his collection of biographies of the saints, the Safinat  al-
auliya*, was accepted in Indian Sufi circles is evident from the fact
that the book was translated into Arabic by Jacfar al-cAydarus in
Bijapur during the prince's lifetime. Dara's Risdla-yi  haqnuma
was planned as a completion of Ibn cArabi's Fusus,  Ahmad Ghaz-
zali's Sawdnih,  clraql's Lama^at,  Jami's Lawffih,  and other short
mystical works, but it lacks the stature of these treatises, just as his
mystical poetry, though it shows great skill in the use of words, is
somewhat dry. In letters and short treatises Dara tried to find a
common denominator for Islam and Hinduism, and his disputa-
tions with a Hindu sage, Baba Lai Das, show his keen interest in
the problem of a common mystical language.
Dara's great work was the translation of the Upanishads into
Persian—a work that he completed with the help of some Indian
scholars, but that unmistakably bears the stamp of his personali-
ty.24 For him, the Upanishads was the book to which the Koran
refers as "a book that is hidden" (Sura 56:78); thus it is one of the
sacred books a Muslim should know, just as he knows the Torah,
the Psalms, and the Gospel. Dara Shikoh's translation, called Sirr-i
akbar, "The Greatest Mystery," was introduced to Europe by the
French scholar Anquetil Duperron, who in 1801 issued its Latin
translation under the title Oupnetfat,  id est secretum  tegendum.
Neither Dara Shikoh nor his translator could have foreseen to what
24. Dara Shikoh, Sirr-i  akbar,  ed. Tara Chand and M. Jalali NaDini (Tehran, 1961).
See Erhard Gobel-Gross, " 'Sirr-i akbar,' Die Upanishad-Ubersetzung Dara Shikohs"
(Ph.D. diss., University of Marburg, 1962).

--- Page 385 ---
362 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
extent this first great book on Hindu mysticism would influence
the thought of Europe. German idealistic philosophers were in-
spired by its contents and praised its eternal wisdom in lofty lan-
guage. Throughout the nineteenth century the Upanishads re-
mained one of the most sacred textbooks for many German and
German-influenced thinkers. Its mystical outlook has, to a large
extent, helped to form in the West an image of India that has little
in common with the realities.
Dara Shikoh despised the representatives of Muslim orthodoxy.
In the same tone as many earlier Persian poets, he could write:
"Paradise is there, where there is no molld."  In the true mystical
spirit, he emphasized the immediate experience as contrasted with
blind imitation: "The gnostic is like the lion who eats only what
he himself has killed, not like the fox who lives on the remnants of
other animals' booty." The feeling of hama  ust, "everything is He,"
permeates all of his work. Dara practiced his ideas of unity and
was surrounded by a number of poets and prose writers who did
not fit into the framework of orthodox Islam. There is the very
strange figure of Sarmad, a highly intellectual Persian Jew.25 After
studying Christian and Islamic theology, he converted to Islam;
later, he came as a merchant to India, fell in love with a Hindu
boy in Thatta, became a dervish, and eventually joined Dara's
circle. It is said that he walked around stark naked, defending
himself with the lines:
Those with deformity He has covered with dresses,
To the immaculate He gave the robe of nudity.
Sarmad is one of the outstanding masters of the Persian quatrain.
Many of his mystical rubd'iydi  are extremely concise and vigorous,
revealing the deep melancholy of a great lover. Several of the tradi-
tional themes of Persian poetry have found their most poignant
expression in his verses. He followed the tradition of Hallaj, longing
for execution as the final goal of his life:
The sweetheart with the naked sword in hand
approached:
In whatever garb Thou mayst come—I recognize Thee!
25. Bashir Ahmad Hashmi, "Sarmad," Islamic  Culture,  1933-34, is a good trans-
lation of his quatrains. See also Walter J. Fischel, "Jews and Judaism at the Court of
the Moghul Emperors in Medieval India," Islamic  Culture,  1951.

--- Page 386 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 363
This idea goes back at least to cAynuDl-Qudat Hamadhani. Sarmad
was, in fact, executed not long after Dara (1661).
Another member of the circle around the heir apparent was
Brahman (d. 1661), his private secretary, a Hindu who wrote good
Persian descriptive poetry and prose. There was also Fan! Kash-
miri, the author of mediocre Persian verses to whom a book on
comparative religion, the Dabistdn-i  madhdhib,  is, probably wrong-
ly, attributed. (Kashmir, the lovely summer resort of the Moguls,
had been a center of mystical poetry since the Kubrawi leader
Sayyid CAH Hamadhani had settled there, with seven hundred fol-
lowers, in 1371.)26
Dara's attitude was regarded with suspicion by the orthodox,
and his younger brother cAlamgir Aurangzeb, coveting the crown,
took advantage of Shah Jihan's illness to imprison his father and
persecute his elder brother. After a series of battles, Dara was even-
tually betrayed to Aurangzeb, who had him executed in 1659, to
become himself the last great ruler of the Mogul Empire (1659-
1707). It is worth noting that Dara's and Aurangzeb's eldest sister,
Jihanara, was also an outstanding mystic and a renowned author
of mystical works. Her master Molla Shah thought her worthy to
be his successor, though this did not materialize.
One other member of the Qadiriyya order in Mogul India de-
serves mention—the great traditionist cAbduDl-Haqq Dihlawi (d.
1642), founder of the traditionist school in Indian Islam. In addi-
tion to a great many works devoted to the revival of hadlth  and to
the interpretation of the Koran, to hagiography and Islamic his-
tory, he is also credited with mystical treatises. As a member of
the Qadiriyya, he commented upon and interpreted famous sayings
of the eponym of his order. In a famous letter he expressed his
disapproval of some of the claims a leading mystic of his time had
made. The mystic in question was Ahmad Sirhindi, with whose
name the "revival of orthodoxy," or the "Naqshbandi reaction,"
is closely connected.
THE "NAQSHBANDI REACTION"
It is typical of the situation in Islamic countries, and
particularly in the Subcontinent, that the struggle against Akbar's
26. See Muhammad Aslah, Tadhkira-yi  shucard-yi Kashmir,  ed. Sayyid Hussamud-
din Rashdi, 5 vols. (Karachi, 1967-68); Girdhari L. Tikku, Persian  Poetry in Kashmir,
1339-1846: A n Introduction  (Berkeley, 1971).

--- Page 387 ---
364 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
syncretism and against the representatives of emotional Sufism was
carried out by a mystical order: the Naqshbandiyya.27 "The Naqsh-
bandiyya are strange caravan leaders/who bring the caravan through
hidden paths into the sanctuary" (N 413). So said Jami, one of the
outstanding members of this order in its second period. The Naqsh-
bandiyya differed in many respects from most of the medieval mys-
tical fraternities in the central Islamic countries. The man who
gave it his name, BahaDuddm Naqshband, belonged to the Central
Asian tradition, which traced its lineage back to Yusuf Hama-
dhani (d. 1140). He was "the imam  of his time, the one who knew
the secrets of the soul, who saw the work" (MT 219).
Hamadhani's spiritual affiliation went back to Kharaqani and
Bayezid Bistami; these two saints remained highly venerated in the
order. According to the tradition, it was Hamadham who encour-
aged cAbduDl-Qadir GilanI to preach in public. Two major tradi-
tions stem from him; one is the Yasawiyya in Central Asia, which in
turn influenced the Bektashiyye in Anatolia. Hamadhani's most
successful khalifa,  besides Ahmad Yasawl, was cAbduDl-Khaliq Ghij-
duwani (d. 1220), who propagated the teachings of his master
primarily in Transoxania. The way he taught became known as the
tariqa-yi Khwdjagdn,  "the way of the Khojas, or teachers." It is said
that he set up the eight principles upon which the later Naqsh-
bandiyya was built:
1) hush dar dam,  "awareness in breathing,"
2) nazar bar qadam,  "watching over one's steps,"
3) safar dar watan,  "internal mystical journey,"
4) khalwat  dar anjuman,  "solitude in the crowd,"
5) ydd hard,  "recollection,"
6) bdz gard,  "restraining one's thoughts,"
7) nigdh ddsht,  "to watch one's thought," and
8) ydd ddsht,  "concentration upon God."
Although BahaDuddin Naqshband (d. 1390) had a formal initia-
tion into the path, he was blessed with an immediate spiritual suc-
cession from Ghijduwani and soon became an active leader of the
Khwajagan groups. His main activities were first connected with
Bukhara, of which he became the patron saint. Even today, the
sellers of wild rue in Afghanistan may offer their merchandise,
which is to be burned against the evil eye, with an invocation of
27. Madeleine Habib, "Some Notes on the Naqshbandi Order," Moslem  World  59
(1969); Marijan Mole, "Autour du Dare Mansour: I'apprentissage mystique de Baha3
al-DIn Naqshband," Revue  des etudes islamiques  27 (1959).

--- Page 388 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 365
Shah Naqshband.28 His order established connections with the
trade guilds and merchants, and his wealth grew parallel to the
growth of his spiritual influence, so that he and his followers and
friends controlled the Timurid court and carefully watched over
religious practices there. At almost the same time the order became
highly politicized.
It may be true that as early as the twelfth century a ruler of
Kashgar had been a disciple of Ghijduwani. The Naqshbandis had
taken an active role in the constant internal feuds among the
Timurid rulers. But it was not until Khwaja Ahrar (1404-90) as-
sumed leadership of the order that Central Asia was virtually domi-
nated by the Naqshbandiyya. His relations with the Timurid prince
Abu Sacid, as well as with the Shibanid Uzbegs, proved decisive for
the development of Central Asian politics in the mid-fifteenth cen-
tury. When Abu Sacld settled in Herat, most of the area toward the
north and the east was under the influence of Khwaja cUbaydullah
Ahrar, who even had disciples in the country of the Mongols, where
Yunus Khan Moghul, Babur's maternal uncle, belonged to the or-
der. Their leaders were, and still are, known as Ishdn,  "they." It was
the Khwaja's conviction that "to serve the world it is necessary to
exercise political power"29 and to bring the rulers under control
so that the divine law can be implemented in every part of life.
The Naqshbandiyya is a sober order, eschewing artistic per-
formance—mainly music and samcf.  Nevertheless, the leading artists
at the court of Herat belonged to this order, among them Jam! (d.
1492), who devoted one of his poetical works to cUbaydullah Ahrar
(Tuhfat al-ahrdr,  "The Gift of the Free"),30 though his lyrical poetry
in general reveals little of his close connection with the Naqsh-
bandiyya. His hagiographic work, the Nafahdt  al-uns,  however, is an
important account of the fifteenth-century Naqshbandiyya, as well
as a summary of classical Sufi thought. The main source for our
knowledge of Khwaja Ahrar's activities is the Rashahdt  ^ayn al-
haydt, "Tricklings from the Fountain of Life," composed by CA1I
ibn Husayn Waciz Kashifi, the son of one of the most artistic prose
writers at the Herat court. Jami's friend and colleague, the vizier,
28. Pierre Centlivres, U n bazar de I'Asie Centrale:  Tashqurgan  (Wiesbaden, 1972),
p. 174.
29. Joseph Fletcher, Th e Old and New Teachings  in Chinese  Islam  (forthcoming).
30. F. Hadland Davis, Th e Persian  Mystics:  Jami  (ca. 1908; reprint ed., Lahore,
n.d.); Jiff Becka, "Publications to Celebrate the 55Oth Anniversary of the Birth of
cAbdur Rahman Jami," Archiv  Orientdlni  34 (1966). For Jami's works see the Bibliog-
raphy.

--- Page 389 ---
366 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
poet and Maecenas of artists, Mir CAH Shir Nawa°I (d. 1501), was
also an initiate of the Naqshbandiyya. He is the greatest representa-
tive of Chagatay Turkish literature, which he encouraged at the
court. Thus the order had among its early members two outstand-
ing poets who deeply influenced Persian and Turkish literatures
and who, like Nawa°i, actively participated in political life.31 More
than two centuries later members of the "anti-artistic" Naqsh-
bandiyya played a similar role in the Indian Subcontinent.
The center of Naqshbandl education is the silent dhikr,  as op-
posed to the loud dhikr,  with musical accompaniment, that at-
tracted the masses to the other orders. The second noteworthy
characteristic is suhbat, 32 the intimate conversation between master
and disciple conducted on a very high spiritual level (cf. N 387).
The close relation between master and disciple reveals itself in
tawajjuh, the concentration of the two partners upon each other
that results in experiences of spiritual unity, faith healing, and
many other phenomena (cf. N 403).
It has been said that the Naqshbandiyya begin their spiritual
journey where other orders end it—the "inclusion of the end in the
beginning" is an important part of their teaching, though it is an
idea that goes back to early Sufi education. It is not the long periods
of mortification but the spiritual purification, the education of the
heart instead of the training of the lower soul, that are character-
istic of the Naqshbandiyya method. " 'Heart' is the name of the
house that I restore," says Mir Dard. They were absolutely sure,
as many of their members expressed it, that their path, with its
strict reliance upon religious duties, led to the perfections of proph-
ethood, whereas those who emphasized the supererogatory works
and intoxicated experiences could, at best, reach the perfections of
sainthood.
The order was extremely successful in Central Asia—successful
enough to play a major role in Central Asian politics during the
31. Vasilij V. Barthold, Herat  zur Zeit Husain Baiqaras,  trans. Walter Hinz (1938;
reprint ed., Leipzig, 1968). Russian scholars have published a considerable number of
studies about NawaDi during recent years.
32. Typical of contemporary Turkish Naqshbandl approach is the title of an un-
fortunately short-lived journal, Sohbet  Dergisi  (Istanbul, 1952-53). See Hasan Lutfi
§usut, Islam  tasavvufunda  Hacegdn  Hanedani  (Istanbul, 1958), selections from the
Rashahat '•ayn  ul-hayat  about the early Naqshbandl masters; §usut, Fakir  sozleri  (Is-
tanbul, 1958), mystical thoughts and aphorisms. An excellent short survey of Naqsh-
bandl thought and practice is given by Hamid Algar, "Some Notes on the Naqshbandi
Tariqat in Bosnia," Di e Welt des Islam,  n.s. 13, nos. 3-4 (1971).

--- Page 390 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 367
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. In India, the Naqsh-
bandiyya gained a firm footing shortly before 1600, i.e., near the
end of Akbar's reign. At that time, Khwaja Baqi billah, a sober
but inspiring teacher, attracted a number of disciples who were
interested in a law-bound mystical life and opposed the sweeping
religious attitude that prevailed in the circles surrounding Akbar.
It was Baqi billah's disciple Ahmad Faruql Sirhindi (1564-1624)
who was destined to play a major role in Indian religious and, to
some extent, political life.33 Ahmad had studied in Sialkot, one of
the centers of Islamic scholarship during the Mogul period. In
Agra he came in touch with Fayzl and Abu3l-Fazl, Akbar's favorite
writers and intimate friends, who were, however, disliked by the
orthodox because of their "heretical" views. Ahmad Sirhindi, like
a number of his compatriots, had an aversion to the Shia, to which
persuasion some of the southern Indian rulers belonged and which
became more fashionable at the Mogul court in the late days of
Akbar's rule and in the reign of Jihangir (1605-27), whose intel-
ligent and politically active wife, Ntir Jihan, was herself Shia. The
constant influx of poets from Iran to India during the Mogul period
considerably strengthened the Shia element, and it was against
them that Ahmad Sirhindi wrote his first treatise, even before he
was formally initiated into the Naqshbandiyya, i.e., before 1600.
For a while, he was imprisoned in Gwalior, but he was set free after
a year, in 1620. Four years later he died.
Although Ahmad Sirhindi composed a number of books, his
fame rests chiefly upon his 534 letters, of which 70 are addressed to
Mogul officials. They were, like many letters by mystical leaders,
intended for circulation, with only a few of them meant for his
closest friends. He gave utterance to ideas that shocked some of
the defenders of orthodoxy, as can be seen from some treatises pub-
lished against his teachings in the late seventeenth century. The
letters have been translated into Arabic, Turkish, and Urdu from
the original Persian, and from them Ahmad gained the honorific-
titles mujaddid-i  alf-i tliani,  "the Renovator of the Second Mil-
lenium" (after the hijra],  and imam-i  rabbdnl,  "the Divinely In-
spired Leader."
In modern times, Ahmad Sirhindi has usually been depicted as
33. Yohanan Friedmann, Shaykh  Ahmad Sirhindi:  An Outline  of His Thought  and
a Study of His Image in the Eyes of Posterity  (Montreal, 1971), is the first compre-
hensive study of his mysticism; see the review by Annemarie Schimmel in Di e Welt
des Islam,  n.s. 14 (1973).

--- Page 391 ---
368 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
the person who defended Islamic orthodoxy against the heterodoxy
of Akbar and his imitators, the leader whose descendants supported
Aurangzeb against his mystically inclined brother Dara Shikoh.
Yohanan Friedman has tried to show that this image developed
only after 1919, in Abu3! Kalam Azad's work, and that it has been
eagerly elaborated by many Indo-Muslim, particularly Pakistani,
scholars. It may be true that Sirhindi's direct influence upon Mogul
religious life was not as strong as his modern adherents claim, but
the fact remains that the Naqshbandiyya, though a mystical order,
has always been interested in politics, regarding the education of the
ruling classes as absolutely incumbent upon them. We may safely
accept the notion that Ahmad's successor in the order had a hand
in the political development that followed his death and that this
situation continued until about 1740.
Ahmad Sirhindi has been praised primarily as the restorer of the
classical theology of wahdat  ash-shuhud,  "unity of vision," or "testi-
monial monism," as opposed to the "degenerate"—as the orthodox
would call it—system of wahdat  al-wujud. 3* However, the problem
can scarcely be seen in such oversimplified terms. Marijan Mole
has interpreted Ahmad's theology well (MM 108-10); he explains
the tauhld-i  wujudl  as an expression of ^ilm  al-yaqln,  and tauhld-i
shuhudl as c ayn al-yaqln.  That means that the tauhld-i  wujudl  is
the intellectual perception of the Unity of Being, or rather of the
nonexistence of anything but God, whereas in tauhld-i  shuhudl
the mystic experiences the union by the "view of certitude," not as
an ontological unity of man and God. The mystic eventually real-
izes, by haqq  al-yaqln,  that they are different and yet connected in
a mysterious way (the Zen Buddhist experiences satori  exactly at
the same point: at the return from the unitive experience, he
realizes the multiplicity in a changed light).
Sirhindi finds himself in full harmony with the great Kubrawi
mystic cAlaDuddaula SimnanI, who had criticized Ibn cArabi's
theories. As a good psychologist, he acknowledges the reality of the
state of intoxicated love, in which the enraptured mystic sees only
the divine unity. But as long as he complies to the words of the
divine law, his state should be classified as kufr-i  tarlqa,  "infidelity
of the Path," which may lead him eventually to the sober state in
34. Bashir Ahmad Faruqi, Th e Mujaddid's  Conception  of God (Lahore, 1952);
Faruqi, Th e Mujaddid's  Conception  of Tauhld  (Lahore, 1940); Aziz Ahmad, "Religious
and Political Ideas of Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi," Rivista  degli studi orientali  36 (1961).

--- Page 392 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 369
which he becomes aware, once more, of the subjectivity of his ex-
perience. Such a reclassification of theories elaborated by the Sufis
of old was perhaps necessary in a society in which the mystically
oriented poets never ceased singing of the unity of all religions and
boasted of their alleged infidelity. This "intoxication" is—and here
again classical ideas are developed—the station of the saint, whereas
the prophet excels by his sobriety, which permits him to turn back,
after the unitive experience, into the world in order to preach God's
word there: prophecy is the way down, is the aspect of reality turned
toward creation.
One of Sirhindi's most astounding theories is, in fact, his proph-
etology. He spoke about the two individuations of Muhammad,
the bodily human one as contrasted to the spiritually angelic one—
the two m' s in Muhammad's name point to them. In the course of
the first millennium, the first m  disappeared to make room for the
alif, the letter of divinity, so that now the manifestation of Ahmad
remains, purely spiritual and unconnected with the worldly needs
of his community. In a complicated process, the new millennium
has to restore the perfections of prophethood. It is no accident that
the change from Muhammad  to Ahmad  coincides with the very
name of Ahmad Sirhindl and points to his discretely hidden role
as the "common believer" called to restore these perfections.
That fits well with certain theories about the qayyum,  the highest
representative of God and His agent (Ahmad wrote, in one of his
letters: "My hand is a substitute for the hand of God"). It is through
the qayyum  that the world is kept in order; he is even higher than
the mystical leader, the qutb,  and keeps in motion everything creat-
ed. Shah Waliullah, in the eighteenth century, seems to equate him
sometimes with "the breath of the merciful," sometimes with the
"seal of the divine names" or with the universal soul.35 The qayyum
has been elected by God, who bestowed upon him special grace,
and, if we believe the Naqshbandiyya sources and especially the
Raudat al-qayyumiyya,  Ahmad Sirhindl claimed that this highest
rank in the hierarchy of beings was held by him and three of his
successors, beginning with his son Muhammad Macsum.36 The
35. Shah Waliullah, Lamahdt,  ed. Ghulam Mustafa Qasimi (Hyderabad, Sind, n.d.),
no. 5. An interesting introduction to the thought of Shah Waliullah is given in J. M. S.
Baljon, trans., A  Mystical  Interpretation  of Prophetic  Tales by an Indian  Muslim:
Shah Walt  Allah's "Ta?wil  al-ahddith"  (Leiden, 1973).
36. AbuDl Fayd Ihsan, "Raudat al-qayyumlya," 1751, manuscript, Library of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal. Only an Urdu translation has been published. Sheikh Mu-

--- Page 393 ---
370 SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
Raudat al-qayyumiyya  is certainly not a solid historical work. Writ-
ten at the time of the breakdown of the Mogul Empire (after 1739),
it reflects the admiration of a certain Naqshbandi faction for the
master and his family; yet it must certainly rely upon some true
statements of Sirhindl and shed light, if not on Naqshbandi history,
at least on mystical psychology. The theories about the qayyumiyya
have only begun to be explored by the scholars of Sufism. The role
of the four qayyums  in Mogul politics has still to be studied in
detail. It is a strange coincidence that the fourth and last qayyum,
Pir Muhammad Zubayr (Ahmad's great-grandson) died in 1740,
only a few months after Nadir Shah's attack on Delhi. The Persian
invasion in northwest India had virtually destroyed the Mogul
rule,37 and now, the "spiritual guardian," too, left this world.
Pir Muhammad Zubayr was the mystical leader of Muhammad
Nasir cAndalib, the father of Mir Dard, to whom Urdu poetry owes
its earliest and most beautiful mystical verses. Once more, the
Naqshbandiyya played a decisive role in the development of a field
in which the founders of the order were not at all interested. Mem-
bers of this order are closely connected with the growth of Urdu
literature in the northern part of the Subcontinent.
Urdu, in its early forms, such as Dakhni, had been used first as
a literary medium by Gisudaraz, the Chishti saint of Golconda in
the early fifteenth century.38 It was developed by mystics in Bijapur
and Gujerat in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In addi-
tion to popular poetry to be remembered by the villagers and the
women, several poetical works on mystical theories were composed
in this language, which soon became fashionable for profane poetry
as well. The first classic to be translated into Dakhni Urdu in the
seventeenth century was cAynuT-Qudat's Tamhiddt.
Later, the greatest lyrical poet of the South, Wall, went to Delhi
in 1707. It was the year of Aurangzeb's death—a date that marks
the end of the glory of the Moguls. Twilight fell on the political
scene. The inherited values were scattered, the social order changed,
hammad Ikram, Riid-i  kauthar,  4th ed. (Lahore, 1969), discusses the work critically.
The only extensive account in a Western language is that in John A. Subhan, Sufism:
Its Saints and Shrines,  ad ed. (Lucknow, India, 1960), a book that contains much pre-
viously neglected material about later Indian Sufism.
37. See W. Cantwell Smith, "The Crystallization of Religious Communities in
Mughal India," in Yddndme-ye  Irdn-e Minorsky  (Tehran, 1969).
38. Maulvi Abdul Haqq, Urdu  ki nashw u numd men Sufiya-i kirdm kd kdm  [The
Contribution of the Sufis to the Development of Urdu] (Karachi, 1953), a most valu-
able study.

--- Page 394 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 371
and even the traditional forms of language and literature were no
longer preserved. Wall attached himself to the Naqshbandi master
Shah Sacdullah Gulshan, a prolific poet in Persian who was fond of
music and was apparently a lovable and soft-hearted person who
played a definite role in the poetry- and music-loving society of
Delhi. Gulshan was also a friend of Bedil (d. 1721), the lonely
poet whose humble tomb in Delhi does not reflect the influence his
poetry had upon Afghan and Central Asian, mainly Tajik, litera-
ture. Bedil, though not a practicing member of any order, was
steeped in the traditions of mystical Islam.39 His numerous math-
naivis deal with philosophical and mystical problems and show a
remarkable dynamism along with dark hopelessness. His favorite
word is shikast,  "broken, break"—an attitude the mystics had always
favored for describing their hearts' state. Bedil's works of mixed
poetry and prose, and his lyrics, offer the reader severe technical
difficulties. The vocabulary, the conceits, the whole structure of his
thought is unusual, but extremely attractive. His stylistic difficulties
are surpassed only by his compatriot Nasir CAH Sirhindi (d. 1697),
who later became a member of the Naqshbandiyya and considerably
influenced the style of some eighteenth-century poets in India with-
out, however, adding anything to the mystical teachings of his
masters.
This tradition of highly sophisticated, almost incomprehensible
Persian poetry was the breeding ground from which Shah Sacdul-
lah Gulshan came. He quickly discovered the poetical strength of
his new disciple Wall. After a few years, it became fashionable in
Delhi to use the previously despised vernacular, rekhta  or Urdu,
for poetry, and in an amazingly short span of time, perfect works
of poetry were written in this language, which was now generally
used instead of the traditional Persian. The breakdown of the
Mogul Empire was accompanied by a breakdown of poetical lan-
guage. Not only did Urdu grow in the capital, but Sindhi, Panjabi,
and Pashto developed literatures of their own during the last de-
cades of Aurangzeb's reign and continued to flourish during the
eighteenth century.
This background must be kept in mind to properly understand
39. Bedil's works have been published in four volumes of approximately 1100 large
folios each: Mirza Bedil, Kulliydt,  4 vols. (Kabul, 1962-65). Alessandro Bausani, "Note
su Mirza Bedil," Annali  dell Istituto Universitario  Orientate  Napoli,  n.s. 6 (1957);
Jifi Befka, "Tajik Literature," in History  of Iranian Literature,  ed. Jan Rypka (Dor-
drecht, 1968), pp. 5i5ff-

--- Page 395 ---
372 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
the role of the Naqshbandis in Delhi. Two of the "pillars of Urdu
literature" belonged to this order: Mazhar Janjanan, the militant
adversary of the Shiites, who was killed by a Shia at the age of
eighty-one in 1782,40 and Mir Dard, the lyrical poet of Delhi whose
mystical poetry is sweeter than anything written in Urdu. These
two men belong as much to the picture of eighteenth-century Delhi
as the figure of Shah Waliullah (1703-62), the defender of the
true faith, initiated into both Qadiriyya and Naqshbandiyya, a
scholar and mystic whose works still await serious study in the West.
(That he was attacked by a disciple of Mazhar shows the manifold
currents inside eighteenth-century Naqshbandl theology.)41 It was
Walmllah who tried to bridge the gap between the tauhld-i  shuhudl
and the tauhld-i  wujudl,  just as he tried to explain the differences
between the law schools as historical facts with no basic difference of
importance. Shah Walmllah also ventured to translate the Koran
into Persian so that the Muslims could read and properly under-
stand the Holy Book and live according to its words—an attempt
that was continued by his sons in Urdu. He was also instrumental
in inviting the Afghan king Ahmad Shah Durrani Abdali to India
to defend the Muslims against the Sikh and Mahratta. From Shah
Walmllah the mystical chain extends to his grandson Shah Ismacil
Shahid, a prolific writer in Arabic and Urdu, and Sayyid Ahmad
of Bareilly, both known for their brave fight against the Sikh, who
had occupied the whole of the Punjab and part of the northwestern
frontier.42 The Urdu poet Momin (1801-51), related through mar-
riage with Mir Dard's family, sided with the two reformers. The
political impact of Shah Walmllah's work helped to form the
modern Indo-Muslim religious life and attitude toward the British.
It has survived in the school of Deoband to our day, though with-
out the strong mystical bias of Shah Walmllah's original thought.
40. Marshall, Mughals  in India,  no. 800. Mazhar's poetical work and his letters have
been published. A number of hagiographical works about him and his branch of the
Naqshbandiyya may be found in Charles Ambrose Storey, Persian  Literature  (London,
1953), i: no. 1375; and Marshall, Mughals  in India,  no. 1357.
41. Alessandro Bausani, "Note su Shah Waliullah di Delhi," Annali  dell Istituto
Universitario Orientale  Napoli,  n.s. 10 (1961); Aziz Ahmad, "Political and Religious
Ideas of Shah Waliullah of Delhi," Moslem  World  50, no. i (1962). The Shah Waliul-
lah Academy in Hyderabad, Sind, under the presidency of Maulana Ghulam Mustafa
Qasimi, has published a number of Waliullah's works, as well as studies about him.
42.^4 History  of Freedom  Movement  (Karachi, 1957), 1:556; Aziz Ahmad, Studies,
pp. 2ioff. See also J. Spencer Trimingham, Th e Sufi Orders in Islam  (Oxford, 1971),
p. 129. The most comprehensive biography is by Ghulam Rasul Mehr, Sayyid  Ahmad
Shahid (Lahore, ca. 1955), in Urdu.

--- Page 396 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 373
It would be interesting to follow the relations between the great
mystical leaders of Delhi during the eighteenth century. Although
Shah Walmllah was, no doubt, the strongest personality among
them, we would prefer to give here some notes about Mir Dard's
work, since he is an interesting representative of fundamentalist
Naqshbandi thought, combined with a deep love of music and
poetry. He was a poet of first rank, as well as a pious Muslim, who
elaborated some of the Naqshbandi ideas in a quite original way.
KHWAJA MIR DARD, A "SINCERE MUHAMMADAN"
.. . and I was brought out of this exciting stage by special grace
and particular protection and peculiar blessing to the station of perfect
unveiling and to the Reality of Islam, and was granted special proximity
to the plane of the Pure Essence Most Exalted and Holy, and became
honored by the honor of the perfection of Prophethood and pure Mu-
hammadanism, and was brought forth from the subjective views of
unity, unification and identity toward complete annihilation, and was
gratified by the ending of individuality and outward traces, and was
exalted to "remaining in God"; and after the ascent I was sent toward
the descent, and the door of Divine Law was opened to me ....
Thus wrote Khwaja Mir Dard of Delhi (1721-85), describing the
mystical way that led him from his former state of intoxication
and poetic exuberance to the quiet, sober attitude of a "sincere
Muhammadan."43
This spiritual way is not peculiar to Mir Dard; it reminds us of
the traditional Naqshbandi theories. Even Ahmad Sirhindi had
spoken in his letters about his former state of intoxication before
he was blessed with the second sobriety, the "remaining in God."
And the "way downward" is, as we saw, connected with the pro-
phetic activities and qualities. Yet in the case of Dard such a state-
ment is worth quoting, since he was usually known as the master
of short, moving Urdu poems, as an artist who composed the first
mystical poetry in Urdu. Scarcely anyone has studied his numerous
Persian prose works, interspersed with verses, in which he unfolds
the doctrines of the tarlqa  Muhammadiyya,  of which he was the
first initiate.
Dard was the son of Muhammad Nasir cAndalib (1697-1758),
43. Annemarie Schimmel, "Mir Dard's Gedanken iiber das Verhaltnis von Mystik
und Wort," in Festgabe  deutscher  Iranisten  zur z^oo-Jahrfeier  Irons,  ed. Wilhelm
Eilers (Stuttgart, 1971); Schimmel, "A Sincere Muhammadan's Way to Salvation," in
Memorial Volume  S. F. G. Brandon,  ed. Eric J. Sharpe and John R Hinnels (Manches-
ter, 1973); Waheed Akhtar, Khwaja  Mir Dard, tasawwuf  aur sha'iri  (Aligarh, India,
1970-

--- Page 397 ---
374 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
a sayyid  from Turkish lands and a descendant of Baha3uddm Naqsh-
band. His mother claimed descent from cAbdu3l-Qadir Gilanl.
Muhammad Nasir gave up the military service to become a dervish;
his master was Sacdullah Gulshan, "rose garden," whose role in the
development of Urdu poetry has already been mentioned. It was in
honor of his master that Muhammad Nasir chose c Andallb, "night-
ingale," as a pen name, just as Gulshan had selected his nom de
plume in honor of his master cAbdu3l-Ahad Gul, "rose," a member
of Ahmad Sirhindi's family. Gulshan spent his later life in Nasir
cAndalib's house, where he died in 1728. cAndalib's second master
was Plr Muhammad Zubayr, the fourth and last qayyum  from the
house of Ahmad Sirhindi, and it was after Plr Zubayr's death that
he composed his Ndla-yi  ^Andalib,  "The Lamentation of the Night-
ingale," which he dictated to his son Khwaja Mir, surnamed Dard,
"Pain."44 It is a strange mixture of theological, legal, and philo-
sophical discourses in the framework of an allegorical story, the
thread of which is often lost. Now and then, charming anecdotes
and verses, dissertations on Indian music or on Yoga philosophy,
can be found, and the ending—in which the hero "Nightingale" is
recognized as the Prophet himself—is one of moving tenderness and
pathetic beauty. Mir Dard considered this book the highest ex-
pression of mystical wisdom, second only to the Koran. It was the
source book for teaching the Muhammadan Path.
Muhammad Nasir had been blessed about 1734 by a vision of
the Prophet's grandson Hasan ibn CA1I, who had introduced him
to the secret of the true Muhammadan Path (at-tarlqa  al-Muham-
madiyyd). (Hasan ibn CAH was considered by the Shadhiliyya to
be "the first Pole," qutb.) 45 Young Dard became his father's first
disciple and spent the rest of his life propagating the doctrine of
"sincere Muhammadanism," which was a fundamentalist inter-
pretation of Islam, deepened by the mystical and ascetic tech-
niques of the Naqshbandiyya. Dard succeeded his father in 1758
and never left Delhi, despite the tribulations that befell the capital
during the late eighteenth century. Dard instructed a number of
Urdu poets, who would gather in his house for musha'iras,  and he
was a prolific writer in Persian. His greatest work, the voluminous
c//m ul-kitdb  (1770), gives a detailed account of his religious ideas
44. Muhammad Nasir cAndalib, Ndla-yi  cAndallb, 2 vols. (Bhopal, 1309 h./1891-92).
45. Paul Nwyia, Ibn '-AtcP  Allah et la naissance  de la confrerie  sadilite  (Beirut, 1972),
p. 31 (quotation from MursI).

--- Page 398 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 375
and of his mystical experiences. It is a kind of spiritual autobiog-
raphy, which bears an amazing similarity to that of the sixteenth-
century Egyptian mystic Shacram. Essentially, Dard's c//m ul-kitdb
was conceived as a commentary on the 111 wdriddt,  short poems and
prose pieces that "descended" upon him about 1750; it then grew
into a work of 111 chapters, each headed by the words Y a Ndsir,
"O Helper," alluding to his father's name. Whatever he wrote was
connected with his father, with whom he had reached perfect iden-
tification. Between 1775 and 1785 he composed the Chahdr  Risdla,
four stylistically beautiful spiritual diaries; each of them is divided
into 341 sections, corresponding to the numerical value of the word
Ndsir.46
When Dard finished his last book, he had reached the age of
sixty-six lunar years, and since his father had died at that age and
God had promised him that he would resemble his father in every
respect, he was sure that he would die very soon. In fact, he died
shortly afterward, on 11 January 1785.
Dard's close relationship with his father is the strangest aspect of
his life. His love for his family meant, at the same time, love for
the Prophet, since both parents claimed sayyid  lineage and thus
special proximity to the Prophet. His father was, for Dard, the
mystical guide par excellence. Traditional Sufi theories regard
the sheikh as the father of the disciple; for Dard the two functions
actually coincided in Muhammad Nasir. This led him to interpret
the theory of ascent and descent in a peculiar way. He begins,
naturally, with the fand  jfsh-shaykh,  annihilation in the sheikh,
which leads to annihilation in the Prophet and annihilation in
God; from there, the descent begins. This descent, usually called
baqd billdh,  was explained by Dard:
fand in God is directed toward God, and baqd  in God is directed toward
creation, and one calls the most perfect wayfarer him who comes down
more than others, and then again becomes firmly established in the
baqd in the Prophet, and he who is on this descendent rank is called
higher and more exalted than he who is still in ascent, for the end is the
return to the beginning.
But higher than he who has reached this stage is he who has found baqd
in his sheikh, for he has completed the whole circle. This is the terminat-
ing rank which God Almighty has kept for the pure Muhammadans
whereas the others with all their power cannot be honored by it. (IK
115-16)
46. Khwaja Mir Dard, c//m ul-kitdb  (Bhopal, 1310 h.). Dard's Chahdr  risdla  (Bho-
pal, 1310 h./1892-93), contains the Ndla-yi  Dard, Ah-i sard, Dard-i dil,  and Sham c-i
mahftl.

--- Page 399 ---
376 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
This experience was born out of Dard's relationship with his own
father-sheikh and could not be shared by anybody else.
Many of the chapters in the c//m ul-kitdb  and the Risdlas  are
devoted to the problems of unity and multiplicity; true "Muham-
madan tauhid"  meant, for him, "immersion in the contemplation
of God along with the preservation of the stages of servantship" (IK
609). Dard frequently attacks those "imperfect Sufis" who claim
"in their immature minds" to be confessors of unity, but are en-
tangled in a sort of heresy, namely, believing in wahdat  al-wujud.
The vision of the all-embracing divine light—and "Light" is the
most appropriate name for God—is the highest goal the mystic can
hope for: a vision in which no duality is left and all traces of distinc-
tion and self-will are extinguished, but which is not a substantial
union. Constant dhikr,  fasting, and trust in God can lead man to
this noble state. Creation is seen through the image of giving light
to pieces of glass—an image known to the earlier mystics: "Just as
in the particles of a broken mirror the One form is reflected, thus
the beauty of the Real Unity of Existence is reflected in the differ-
ent apparent ranks of beings. . . . God brings you from the dark-
nesses to the Light, i.e., He brings you who are contingent
quiddities from nonexistence into existence" (IK 217). But Dard
was well aware that the "pantheistic" formulation so dear to the
poets—"everything is He"—was dangerous and incorrect. In com-
mon with the elders of his order, he saw that "everything is from
Him" and, as the Koran attests, "whithersoever ye turn, there is the
Face of God" (Sura 2:109). "From every form in this worldly rosebed
pluck nothing except the rose of the vision of God."47 He does not
shun the traditional imagery of Persian poetry when he addresses
the Lord in his prayer: "We, beguiled by Thy perfect Beauty, do
not see in all the horizons anything but Thine open signs .... The
light of faith is a sign of coquetry from the manifestation of Thy
face, and the darkness of infidelity is dressed in black from the
shade of Thy tresses."48
Dard elaborated the theories of the divine as they are reflected
in the different levels of creation, a creation that culminates in man,
the microscosm reflecting the divine attributes. It is man who is
the seal of the degrees of creation, for after him no species has come into
existence, and he is the sealing of the hand of Omnipotence, for God
47. Ah-i sard,  no. 192.
48. Ah-i sard,  no. 96.

--- Page 400 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 377
Most Exalted has said: "I created him with My hands" [Sura 38:75]. He
is, so to speak, the divine seal that has been put on the page of contin-
gency, and the Greatest Name of God has become radiant from the
signet of his forehead. The alif  of his stature points to God's unity, and
the tughrd  of his composition, i.e., the absolute comprehensive picture of
his eyes, is an h  with two eyes, which indicates Divine Ipseity [huwiyya].
His mouth is the door of the treasure of Divine mysteries, which is
opened at the time of speaking, and he has got a face that everywhere
holds up the mirror of the Face of God, and he has got an eyebrow for
which the word "We honored the children of Adam" [Sura 17:72] is
valid. (IK 422)
In fact, as he says in one of his best-known Urdu lines:
Although Adam had not got wings,
yet he has reached a place that was not destined even
for angels.49
It is this high rank of man that enables him to ascend through the
stages of the prophets toward the proximity of Muhammad and
thus toward the haqlqa  Muhammadiyya,  the first principle of in-
dividuation.
Like a number of mystics before him, Dard went this way, and
his spiritual autobiography (IK 504-5) gives an account of his
ascent-in Arabic, as always when he conveys the highest mysteries
of faith.
And He made him his closest friend [safl]  and His vicegerent on earth
by virtue of the Adamic sanctity [see Sura 3:30].
And God saved him from the ruses of the lower self and from Satan
and made him His friend [ndjl]  by virtue of the Noachian sanctity.
And God softened the heart of the unfeeling before him and sent to
him people of melodies by virtue of the sanctity of David.
He made him ruler of the kingdom of his body and his nature, by a
manifest power, by virtue of the sanctity of Solomon.
And God made him a friend [khalll]  and extinguished the fire of
wrath in his nature so that it became "cool and peaceful" [Sura 21:69]
by virtue of the Abrahamic sanctity.
And God caused the natural passions to die and slaughtered his lower
soul and made him free from worldly concern so that he became com-
pletely cut off from this world and what is in it, and God honored him
with a mighty slaughtering [Sura 37:107] in front of his mild father,
and his father put the knife to his throat in one of the states of being
drawn near to God in the beginning of his way, with the intention of
slaughtering him for God, and God accepted him well, and thus he is
really one who has been slaughtered by God and remained safe in the
outward form as his father gave him the glad tidings: "Whoever has not
49. Khwaja Mir Dard, Urdu  Diwan,  ed. Khalll ur-Rahman DaDudi (Lahore, 1962),
P-9-

--- Page 401 ---
378 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
seen a dead person wandering around on earth may look at this son of
mine who lives through me and who moves through me!" In this state
he gained the sanctity of Ishmael.
God beautified his nature and character and made him loved and ac-
cepted by His beloved [Muhammad]. He attracted the hearts to him
and cast love for him into his father's heart—a most intense love!—and
he taught him the interpretation of Prophetic traditions by virtue of the
sanctity of Joseph [Sura 12:45].
God talked to him in inspirational words when he called: "Verily, I
am God, put off thy shoes! [Sura 20:12] of the relations with both worlds
from the foot of your ascent and throw away from the hand of your
knowledge the stick with which you lean on things besides Me, for you
are in the Holy Valley" [by virtue of] the sanctity of Moses.
God made him one of His complete words and breathed into him
from His own spirit [Sura 15:29, 38:72], and he became a spirit from
him [Sura 4:169] by virtue of the sanctity of Jesus.
And God honored him with that perfect comprehensiveness which is
the end of the perfections by virtue of the sanctity of Muhammad, and
he became according to "Follow me, then God will make you loved by
His beloved," and he was veiled in the veil of pure Muhammadanism
and annihilated in the Prophet, and no name and trace remained with
him, and God manifested upon him His name The Comprising [al-
jdmic] and helped him with angelic support.
And he knows through Gabriel's help without mediation of sciences
written in books, and he eats with Michael's help without outward sec-
ondary causes, and he breathes through Israfil's breath and loosens the
parts of his body and collects them every moment, and he sleeps and
awakes every day and is drawn toward death every moment by Azrail's
attraction.
God created him as a complete person in respect to reason, lower
soul, spirit and body, and as a place of manifestation of all His names
and the manifestation of His attributes, and as He made him vicegerent
of earth in general for humanity generally, so He also made him the
vicegerent of His vicegerent on the carpet of specialisation, especially
to complete His bounty in summary and in detail, and He approved for
him of Islam outwardly and inwardly [Sura 5:5], and made him sit
on the throne of vicegerency of his father, as heritage and in realisation,
and on the seat of the followers of His prophet by attestation and Divine
success.
This description shows the steady ascent of Dard until he reaches
the closest possible relation to the Prophet through his father.
Many mystics considered themselves to be united with the spirit
of a particular prophet, but just as the Muhammadan Reality em-
braces the spirits of all prophets, Dard realized all their different
stages in himself. The name al-jdmf,  "the Comprising," which was
given to him, is, in fact, the divine name specialized for man as the
last level of emanation, as Ibn cArabi claimed.50
50.8. A. Q. Husain, Th e Pantheistic  Monism of Ibn al-Arabi  (Lahore, 1970), p. 58.

--- Page 402 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 379
Dard's lis t is not as comprehensiv e as the list of twenty-eigh t
prophets show n by Ibn cArabi as the loci of particula r divine
manifestations, no r does it correspon d with the list his father men
tions: there , Adam manifest s the Divine Will or Creativity ; Jesus,
Life; Abraham , Knowledge ; Noah, Power; David, Hearing ; Jacob,
Seeing; an d Muhammad , Existence—th e seven basic attribute s of
God. One may also recall the list develope d by the Kubraw i mystic
Simnam, wh o connect s the seven prophet s with the seven lata?if or
spiritual center s of man: the Adam of man's being, connecte d with
black color , is the qalabiyya,  the outward , formal aspect; Noah
(blue color) , the aspect of the nafs, the lower soul; Abraham (red
color), the aspect of the heart; Moses (white color), the aspect of the
sirr, the innermos t core of the heart; David (yellow color), the spiri-
tual (ruhi)  aspect; Jesus (luminou s black), the innermos t secret
(khafi); an d Muhamma d (green color), the haqqiyya,  the point
connected wit h the divine reality (CL 182). Accordin g to thes
theories, th e mystic who had reached the green after passing the
luminous blac k is the "true Muhammadan " (CL 193).
Dard did not propoun d a color mysticism , but his claims are re-
vealing. H e was blessed with auditions , and he records, again in
Arabic (fo r God speaks to His servant in the languag e of the Koran):
And he said: "Say: If Reality were more than that which was unveiled
to me, then God would verily have unveiled it to me, for He Most High
has complete d for me my religion and perfecte d for me His favor and
approved fo r me Islam as religion , and if the veil were to be opened I
would no t gain more certitude—veril y my Lord possesse s mighty boun-
ty." (IK 61)
After this report of an experienc e in which Dard was invested a
the true successo r of the Prophet , he goes on to speak of the names
by which God has distinguishe d him. He gives a long list of his
"attributive an d relative " names: ninety-nin e names have been be-
stowed upo n him, correspondin g to the ninety-nin e most beautifu l
names of God. We cannot judge whethe r these names point to a
veiling of his real personalit y or whether they are an expressio n of
the search for identity reflected in his poetry and prose. It may be
remembered tha t his father was predispose d to surroundin g the
heroes of his books with long chains of high-soundin g names.
Only a few people probabl y knew these secret names of Dard or
the comprehensiv e theologica l system hidden behind the short verses
he wrote, which became the favorite poetry of the people of Delhi,

--- Page 403 ---
380 / SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTA N
Delhi whic h time has now devastated -
Tears are flowing now instead of its rivers:
This town has been like the face of the lovely,
and its suburbs like the down of the beloved ones! 51
He prayed for the unhapp y populatio n that God might not allow
foreign armie s to enter the town— as happene d time and again dur-
ing his lifetime. He was certainly being idealisti c when he expresse d
the though t that it would be better for the poverty-stricke n and
destitute inhabitant s of the capital "to follow the path of God and
the Muhammada n Path, so that they may pluck the roses of inner
blessings fro m the rose garden of their compan y and listen to the
'Lamentation o f the Nightingale ' and understan d his works." 52
One of his biographer s writes that "the mountai n of his patience
would hav e made Sheikh Farld Ganj-i Shakar bite his fingers from
amazement lik e sugarcane, " for he never left Delhi, and apparentl y
did not even leave the compoun d that had been given to him and his
father by one of Aurangzeb' s daughters . "Why should I go out?
It means just a loss of time; for everywher e there is nothing apparen t
but annihilatio n in annihilation , and at every place the lustre of
'Everything i s perishin g except His Face' [Sura 55:26] become s
visible."53 Dard' s life was sternly ascetic. Later biographer s empha-
size mainl y the long periods of fasting he kept; even his family,
whom he loved dearly, took part in the constant fasting.
There wer e only two things other than purely religiou s activitie s
that Dard enjoyed , both of which were contrary to the strict Naqsh-
bandi practice : poetry and music. He was well versed in classica l
Indian music , and in his own defense he had written a book on
music (Hurmat-i ghina). The samcf meetings that he arranged twice
a month were famous in Delhi, and even the ruler, Shah cAlam
II, with the pen name Aftab, sometime s attende d them. The can-
did logic by which Dard defends his love for music is somewha t
amusing:
My sama c is from God, and God is witness that the singers come from
themselves an d sing wheneve r they want; not that I would call them and
would conside r it a sort of worship when I listen to them, as others do;
but I do not refuse such an act. However,  I do not do it myself, and my
creed is that of the masters [i.e., the Naqshbandiyya] . But since I am
imprisoned i n this affliction accordin g to the Divine Assent— what can
no. 140.
52. Dard-i  Dil, no. 154.
53. Ibid., no. 33.tji.Nala,

--- Page 404 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 381
I do? God may absolve me for I have not given a fatwd to my friends that
this shoul d be licit; and I have not built the mystical path upon samcf
so that the other masters of the Path who have absolutel y no idea of the
way of modulatio n should have become dissonan t and sing about me all
those melodie s which one should not sing, and open the lip of reproach
without reaso n in my absence. 54
Dard mus t have been attacke d by other Sufis for his love of music,
and it is regrettable tha t we still know so little about his relation -
ships wit h Shah Walmlla h and Mazha r Janjanan , the two great
Naqshbandi leader s of Delhi. His mystica l poetry was apparentl y
also misunderstoo d by some of his colleagues , as we can guess from
some sad remarks scattere d in his later works. But he loved writing ;
the capacit y of logical and clear speech was, for him, the divine
trust offere d to heaven and earth, but accepted only by man (Sura
33:72)—a trus t that has been explaine d differentl y in the course
of Islami c theology . Dard though t that "a gnostic withou t a book
is like a man withou t children , and a work that is absurdly uncon-
nected is like a child of bad character " (IK 592). His books were,
indeed, hi s beloved children , and he was grateful that God had
granted hi m both externa l and interna l children of whom he could
boast. His son, with the pen name Alam, "Pain," was a poet in his
own right , and so was Dard's younges t brother , Athar, who was
connected wit h him by a very close love and was virtuall y his alter
ego.
As soft-spoker i as Dard may appear from some of his poems, he
was quite certain that his literary activity was superior to that of
many othe r mystics and poets. He felt that he had been granted ,
"like the candle, the tongue of clear speech. " He often asserted
that he never wrote poetry on commissio n but that it came to him
by inspiration , so that he simply wrote it down withou t persona l
effort. Hi s whole work is, in fact, an interpretatio n of those lines
that had been reveale d to him, and the way that he explaine d the
simplest an d most charmin g verses in the framewor k of mystica l
philosophy, wit h a terminolog y borrowe d from Ibn cArabI, is
surprising and , quite frankly, not very uplifting . His Persian poetry
followed th e traditiona l pattern s and the inherite d imagery , and
is good and readable , but his fame rests primaril y on the small Urdu
Dlwan of some 1200 verses, most of which are of unsurpassabl e
beauty. H e sings of the unity of the created beings experience d by
the mystic :
54. Nala,  no. 38.

--- Page 405 ---
382 / SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
In the state of collectednes s the single beings of the
world are one:
all the petals of the rose together are one.55
The garde n imagery is taken up, not as brilliantl y as in classica l
poetry, bu t somewha t veiled in melancholy :
We are unaware of our own manifestatio n in this garden:
the narcissu s does not see its own spring with its own
eye.56
He speak s of the footprin t in the desert or in the street of the be-
loved and compare s life to an imprint in water. He uses the image
of the "fairy in the bottle" as much as the "dance of the peacock, "
but his favorite image is that of the mirror. The whole creation is
one great mirror, or a large number of mirrors, reflectin g God's
overwhelming beauty . He knew that the world of matter is needed
to show the radiance of the pure light:
My turpitud e is the place of manifestatio n for the
lights of purity;
as much as I am iron, I can become a mirror. 57
Constant recollectio n polishes the mirror of the heart to show God's
hidden beauty , that "hidden treasure " that wanted to become
manifest. An d yet the "sacred valley of absolute existence " remains
concealed behin d the sand dunes of various individuations , which
change thei r forms every moment , and the weary wayfare r becomes
aware tha t the desert of absolutenes s is caught in new limitations .
What is all this life? It is real only as far as God has shed His
light upo n it, but it is like a puppet play, like a dream. Dard's
famous lin e says this:
Alas, O ignorant one: at the day of death this will be
proved:
A dream was what we saw, what we heard, a tale.58
Dard take s up the Propheti c tradition , "men are asleep, and when
they die, they awake"— a hadlth that had been popular with the
55. Dard, Urdu Diwan,  p. 57.
56. Dlwan-i  Farsi, p. 45.
57. Dard, Urdu  Diwdn, p. 49.
58. Ibid., p. 2.

--- Page 406 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 383
mystics throughou t the centuries . Rumi had often warned people
not to worry about the facts of this life—wh y should we worry about
a pain we feel in a dream that will end as soon as the morning of
eternal life—th e Morgenglanz  der Ewigkeit—dawns  upon us? But
Rumi is more optimisti c than later poets: he speaks of the joyful
apprehension o f all the possibilitie s that will open up before man
once he returns to his original home (like the elephan t who dreamed
of India). In Dard's verses, the feeling of the dreamlik e state is
filled with hopelessness—wha t could an inhabitan t of eighteenth -
century Delh i expect from life? It is a nightmare , unreal; and the
use of the word "tale" in the verse just mentione d remind s the
reader of the usual connectio n of fairy tales, which were told at
evening tim e to put children to bed. "Tale" and "sleep" have been
invariably—since th e days of Omar Khayyam—connecte d in Persian
poetry.
Dard's verses , which look so fragile and have yet lasted longer
than most poems written in the eighteent h century—verse s that are
veritable gems—reflec t the situatio n in Delhi very well: dream,
footprints o r shifting sand dunes, a reflection in flowing water, and
again the hope for the vision of the beloved , which the mystic
should fin d behind all these fading individua l existences , whose
face does not perish like them. Then, he will realize:
Pain and happines s have the same shape in this world:
You may call the rose an open heart, or a broken heart. 59
MYSTICAL POETRY IN THE REGIONAL LANGUAGES—
SINDHI, PANJABI, PASHTO
The visito r who stays in a Panjabi village will certainly
find somebod y to sing for him the old romanc e of Htr Ranjhd in
the classica l form given it by Warith Shah in the late eighteent h
century. Whe n he proceeds , then, to Sind, to the lower Indus valley,
he will enjoy listening to the moving mystica l songs of Shah cAbdu3!-
Latif of Bhit (1689-1752 ) or the ardent poems of Sachal Sarmast
(d. 1826), whose melodie s and words are almost as popular today
as they were 150 years ago. The Punjab and the Indus valley have a
common traditio n of mystica l folk literature. 60 At approximatel y
59. Ibid., p. 41.
60. Lajwant i Ramakrishna , Panjabi  Siifi Poets (London and Calcutta , 1938), is the
only introductio n to the subject, but see the review by Johann Fiick in Orientalistische

--- Page 407 ---
384 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTAN
the same time, in the thirteent h century , the fertile areas of present
Pakistan becam e the seat of mystics who had migrate d from the
central land s of the Muslim world, partly because of the threat of
the approachin g Mongols . Faridudd m Ganj-i Shakar of Pakpatta n
is credited with having used a kind of Old Panjabi for his mystical
songs. Reliabl e traditio n traces the use of the native languag e for
mystical poetr y both in Sind and in the Punjab back to the fifteenth
century. Th e name of a sixteenth-centur y Panjabi Sufi, Madho
Lai Husayn , is mentione d by Dara Shikoh in his Hasandt  al-cdrifin.
This Madh o Lai (1539-93 ) nacl sung of his love for a Hindu boy
in simple Panjab i verses, and his poems contain the traditiona l
mystical vocabular y of longing and hope for annihilation . He
also allude d to popular motifs, like the stories of Hir and of Sohni
Mehanwal, an d thus seems to inaugurat e (or perhaps even con-
tinue from unknow n beginnings ) a tradition typical of the religiou s
poetry of the two provinces : the insertio n of folk tales into the
context o f mystica l thought. Madho Lai's anniversary , still cele-
brated in Lahore near the Shalima r Garden on the last Saturday in
March, is famous as Meld Chirdghdn,  the "Fair of Lamps."
Also in the sixteent h century , a group of mystics migrated from
Sind to Burhanpu r in central India, where they founded a new
branch of the Qadiriyy a tanqa; they are reported to have used
Sindhi verse s during their samcf sessions. 61 From that time on the
indigenous Sindh i tradition contains innumerabl e stories of saints,
mainly of those who are buried on Makli Hill near Thatta. Makli
Hill, one of the most fascinatin g sites of Indo-Musli m architecture ,
is the last resting place for 125,000 saints, accordin g to the tra-
dition. An interestin g Persian book written in the late eighteent h
century, Mi r CAH Shir Qani cs Maklindme,  retells the numerou s
legends surroundin g this graveyard , which stretche s over miles,
where mystica l concerts and dances were performe d on almost any
day of the week. 62
Literaturzeitung 4 3 (1943); he rightly criticize d the overall Hindu interpretation .
Lionel D . Barnett, Panjabi:  Printed Books in the British Museum  (London , 1961). A
good surve y in Urdu is Shafi c cAqeel, Panjabrang  (Lahore , 1968). Icjazul Haq q Qud-
dusi, Tadhkira-yi  Sufiyd-yi Sindh (Karachi , 1959); Quddusi , Tadhkira-yi  sufiyd-yi Pan-
jab (Karachi , 1962); Jethmal Parsram , Sufis of Sind (Madras , 1924). Annemari e Schim-
mel, "Sindh i Literature, " in History of Indian Literature,  ed. Jan Gonda (Wiesbaden ,
1974)-
61. Rashi d Burhanpuri , Burhanpur  ke Sindhi auliya (Karachi , 1957).
62. Mir CA1I Shir Qani c, Maklindme,  ed. Sayyid Hussamuddi n Rashdi (Karachi ,
1967)-

--- Page 408 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 385
The Punja b and Sind show close similaritie s in the types of mys-
tical literatur e that flourishe d there. The more rustic, very idiomati c
Panjabi an d the complicated , musical Sindhi—bot h strong, ex-
pressive languages—wer e excellen t media to express mystica l feel-
ings, thoug h not mystica l theories . The mystica l works center
around th e endless yearning of the soul, burning love, longing for
pain, whic h is the very blessing of God. These themes were sung
time and again in forms inherite d from the Indian past—dhoras,
kdfis, way—not  in the Persian form of ghazal in quantitativ e meters,
but in Indian poetica l forms that were closely connecte d with in-
digenous musica l modes. The tunes were partly adapted from the
Indian tradition , partly invente d by the mystica l poets themselve s
on the basis of classical and folk music.
The old accusation s against the dry-as-dus t theologians , the
molld, whic h form a standard motif of Persian and Turkish mystical
and quasi-mystica l poetry, were taken up again by the mystics in
the northwes t part of the Subcontinent .
Reading an d reading knowledge , the muftis give
judgment,
but withou t love they have remaine d ignorant , Sir!
By reading knowledg e the secret of God is not known,
only one word of love is efficient, Sir!
an eighteenth-centur y Panjab i poet sings. 63 Such verses appeale d
particularly t o the peasants and the illiterate , who understoo d that
even they—thoug h not learned like the hairsplittin g mollds— might
attain a higher level of spiritual life through surrende r in love.
The imager y in this poetry is generall y taken from the daily
life of the villagers , from gardenin g and planting . Though the
verses of the first great Panjabi mystica l poet, Sultan Bahu (who
got his surname because each line of his Siharfi, "Golden Alpha-
bet," ends with the exclamatio n hu, "He") do nothing but develop
ideas well known to earlier Sufis, his approach is worth mentionin g
as typical of the way rural mystics spread the ideas of Sufism. 64 The
first verse of Sultan Barm's (d. 1691) poem goes:
Alif: Alla h is like the jasmine plant which the precepto r
planted in my heart—o Hu!
By water and the gardene r of negation and positive
63. Ramakrishna , Panjabi Sufi Poets, p. xxx.
64. Sultan Bahoo, Abydt, trans. Maqboo l Elahi (Lahore , 1967).

--- Page 409 ---
386 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTAN
statement i t remained near the jugular vei n
and everywhere— o Hu!
It spread fragranc e inside when it approache d the
time of blossoming— o Hu!
May the efficient precepto r live long, says Bahu,
who plante d this plant—o Hu!
These line s point to the recollectio n of the divine name, planted
in the mystic's heart by his Pir. The water of negation and affirma-
tion, the Id and ilia of the professio n of faith in the dhikr, is com-
bined wit h the allusion to Sura 50:16—"H e is nearer to you than
your jugula r vein"—i n the context of plant life. This verse is a fine
example o f the kind of Panjabi and Sindhi imagery that could
easily be understoo d by everybod y in the village.
In both provinces , a preferenc e for the motif of spinning and
weaving ca n be observed , a natural propensit y in a cotton-growin g
country; th e dhikr could therefor e be compare d to the act of spin-
ning (the aptness of the image is enhance d by the similarit y of the
humming sounds) . Such "spinning " can turn the heart into fine,
precious thread , which God will buy at Doomsda y for a good price.
Both province s have also produce d hymns extollin g the great
masters o f the mystica l orders, particularl y cAbduDl-Qadir Gilani ,
whose gloriou s deeds are often celebrated . One of the first "geogra-
phical" poem s in Sindhi was compose d in his honor. His blessing s
are describe d as extendin g to a long series of cities and countrie s
nicely enumerate d in alliterativ e form. 65 Allusion s to the fate of
Mansur Halla j are very common. 66 Some of the mystica l poets ex-
pressed thei r feelings of all-embracin g unity with amazing audacity
—the Sufi is no longer Arab, Hindu, Turk, or Peshawari ; eventuall y
Hallaj an d the judge who condemne d him, the lover and the theo-
logian, ar e seen as nothing but differen t manifestation s of the
one divin e reality. Such verses have led a number of authors, par-
ticularly th e Hindus who studied this aspect of Indo-Musli m
65. The author, Jaman Charan , lived in the eighteent h century . His poem was often
imitated. Se e Dr. Nabi Bakhsh Baloch, ed., Madahun  ayn munajatun  (Karachi , 1959),
no. i.
66. On the whole literary complex see Annemari e Schimmel , "The Activitie s of the
Sindhi Adab i Board," Die Welt des Islam, n.s. 4, nos. 3-4 (1961); Schimmel , "Neue
Veroffentlichungen zu r Volkskund e von Sind," Die Welt des Islam, n.s. 9, nos. 1-4
(1964); Schimmel , "The Martyr-Mysti c Hallaj in Sindhi Folk-Poetry, " Numen  9, no. 3
(1962).

--- Page 410 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 387
religious life , to believe that here Indian advaita mysticis m gained
a complet e victory over Islamic monotheism . The love for the
sheikh an d the attempt at becomin g annihilate d in him, which is
a peculiar feature of Sufi practices , has also been explaine d as the
typical Hind u love for the guru.
There is no doubt that the Indian Sufis were inclined to take over
images an d forms from their Hindu neighbors ; however , none of
the Panjab i or Sindhi mystics neglecte d the love of the Prophet ,
whose miracle s are told and retold in poetry throughou t the coun-
try. Even on the level of simple folk songs, riddles, or bridal songs
the traditional wordplays on Ahmad and Ahad were repeated, and
the poetry of Shah cAbduDl-Latif contain s a fine descriptio n of the
Prophet throug h the image of the rain cloud, the symbol of divine
mercy, whos e help is implored for the Day of Judgment . Exalted
descriptions o f Muhamma d as the Perfect Man, who is like the
dawn betwee n the divine light and the darkness of human existence ,
can be read in the theoretica l works of some Sindhi Sufis, for ex-
ample, th e eighteenth-centur y Suhraward I mystic ^bduVRahi m
Girhori, wh o paid with his life for his missionar y zeal. 67 The
popular veneratio n of the Prophet was grounde d theoreticall y in
such a way that the historica l person of the Prophe t was almost
totally eclipse d behind the veil of light that the Sindhi Sufis wove
about him .
A strange fact—mor e visible in Sind than in the Punjab—i s the
way Hindu s shared in the Muslim orders. Some saints were claimed
by both communities , like Sheikh Tahir, who was called Lai Udero
by the Hindus. 68 This sixteenth-centur y mystic was one of the most
ardent defender s of the unity of being; he saw God "even in a
camel." Hind u writers wrote mystica l poems in which they used
the imager y of the Muslims ; they compose d poems in honor of
the Prophet and even wrote tcfziya for the Muharram mourning
of the Shia communit y of Sind; or they devoted ballads to the
fate of famous Sufi martyrs. 69 They played a prominen t part in
the study of Sufism as well, though, as pointed out earlier, they
usually lacke d a true understandin g of the Koran and the founda-
67. Umar Muhamma d Daudpota , Kaldm-i  Girhori (Hyderabad , Sind, 1956).
68. Mir CA1I Shir Qani c, Tuhfat al-kirdm  (Hyderabad , Sind, 1957), p. 389.
69. Mir CA1I Shir Qani c, Maqdldt  ash-shu'-ara,  ed. Sayyid Hussamuddi n Rashd i
(Karachi, 1956) , p. 867.

--- Page 411 ---
388 / SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTA N
tions of Muslim faith and tried to explain everythin g in the light
of Hindu philosophy .
A feature common to Panjabi and Sindhi mysticism is the use of
folk tales as vehicles for the expressio n of mystica l experiences .
The first known representativ e of this trend, Madho Lai Husayn ,
has already been mentioned. The theme of Hir Ranjha was used by
Bullhe Shah , as well as by his younger contemporar y Hashim Shah
of Amritsar , for their mystica l meditations .
Bullhe Sha h (1680-1752 ) is considere d the greatest of the Pan-
jabi mystica l poets; he lived near Lahore. 70 Like his contemporarie s
Shah cAbduDl-Latif i n Sind and Shah Wallullah , Mir Dard, and
Mazhar Janjana n in Delhi, he was a witness of the epoch of great
political disaster s that occurred , with only brief interruptions , in
the northwester n part of the Subcontinen t after Aurangzeb' s death
in 1707. Like these mystics, he found peace in the inner world of
love and surrender , singing his mystica l songs in order to console
himself an d his friends in the times of external  sufferings and afflic-
tions. His poetry was so highly esteeme d that he was surname d "the
Rumi of Punjab." In addition to being the leading poet of Panjabi
Sufism, he also compose d a number of Persian prose treatises , com-
parable to those of Mir Dard.
The story of Hir Ranjha probably goes back to an historica l event
in the sixteent h century . Ranjha, the son of a landlord of the
Sargodha district , falls in love with Hir, the daughte r of the ruler
of Djang. Despite her father's prohibition , the lovers meet in the
fields, unti l HIr's uncle catches them. Hir is first imprisone d in her
father's hous e and then married to a Rajput, but she manage s to
send a letter to her beloved . After numerou s tribulations , the luck-
less lovers die. Accordin g to one version, they are poisoned by HIr's
family; in another version they die from thirst in the desert during
their pilgrimag e to Mecca and are eventuall y united in death (or,
by drinkin g the water of life, in eternal life).
This story has been told by nearly a hundred poets in Panjabi ,
Persian, Urdu , and Sindhi and has been translate d several times
into English . It was given its classical form by Warith Shah (com-
pleted aroun d 1794). Since the tale was known to everybody , the
poet has the heroes recite short verses, which are commonl y inter-
preted in a mystical sense. Mohan Singh Diwana , the best authorit y
70. Bullh e Shah, Diwdn,  ed. Faqir M. Faqir (Lahore , 1960).

--- Page 412 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 389
on Panjab i literatur e and a mystic in his own right, 71 has translate d
the mystica l interpretatio n given by Warith Shah:
Our soul is the tragic heroine Hlr,
Our body is the lover Ranjha,
Our spiritua l precepto r is the Yogi Balmath ,
the five helpful saints are our five senses
who suppor t us in our adventures ' dread.
Truth is the judge.
Our deeds , good and bad, are the two boat-wome n
who lust for us.
The shepherd s in the forest are the recordin g angels
who at our shoulder s invisible sit.
The secre t chamber is the grave,
Saida Kher a is the angel of death.
The lame uncle, Kaido, is the reprobat e and renegad e
Satan who delights to introduc e into disobedienc e and
disgrace.
The girl friends of Hlr are our relationship s
and loyaltie s that bind us fast.
Reason is the flute
that to us the music of Divine wisdom conveys .
Warith Sha h says: Those alone cross over
who have silently prayed to the Lord,
and ever devotedl y recited His glorious Name.
"Hlr is our soul"—on e of the characteristic s of Sindhi and Panjab i
poetry is that the longing soul is always depicted as a woman; this
typical aspec t of Indian Sufi poetry was inherited from Hinduis m
(see Appendi x 2).
The most outstandin g master of popular Sufi poetry in Pakista n
is, no doubt, Shah cAbduDl-Latif o f Bhit. He is not the first in the
long line of Sindhi mystical poets. Attempt s at expressin g mystica l
experiences i n the Sindhi tongue go back at least to the sixteent h
century. A  prominen t master was Qadi Qadan (d. 1546), of whose
work only a few verses have been preserved ; they distinctl y show,
however, al l the peculiaritie s of later poetry. The poems of cAbdu3!-
71. Mohan Singh Diwana , An Introduction  to Panjabi Literature  (Amritsar , 1951).
The best translatio n is Charles Frederic k Usborne , Hir Ranjha,  ed. Mumtaz Hasan
(Karachi, 1966) . On the subject in Indo-Persia n literatur e see Hafeez Hoshyarpurl ,
Mathnawiydt-i Hl r Ranjha (Karachi , 1957).

--- Page 413 ---
/ SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN
Latif's ancesto r Shah cAbduDl-Karim72 o r those of Shah clnat73 in the
seventeenth centur y are closely related to Latif's poetry. Their lan-
guage is extremel y compact , since the Sindhi gramma r allows very
intricate combination s of words. Each group of poems, which rhyme
according t o particula r rules of popular Indian prosody , usually
contains a n alternatio n between the recitatio n of the main verses by
a solo voice and the repetitio n of a so-called kdfi or way by a chorus;
the way usually sums up the contents of the whole group of verses.
Shah cAbdu3l-Latif wa s born into a family of mystics in 1689 in
Hala, nea r present-da y Hyderabad-Sind, 74 where mystica l leaders
of the Suhrawardiyy a had settled—th e name of Makhdu m Null in
the seventeent h century is best known. In his early years Latif wan-
dered throug h the country in the compan y of a group of yogis and
perhaps reache d the sacred mountai n Hinglaj in Balochistan , which
is often mentione d as "the goal" in Sindhi mystical poetry. He then
settled dow n in Bhit, not far from his hometown , and gathere d a
number o f disciple s around him. His tomb in Bhit Shah is one of
the lovelies t sanctuarie s in the Muslim world. The building , cov-
ered with blue and white tiles (typical of Hala), with exquisit e
ornaments, exude s serenity and peace. The pillar bases are almost
suggestive o f large flowers just opening , and delicat e tilewor k
decorates th e ceiling.
We do not know much about Shah Latif's external life; his per-
sonality i s reflected in the poems collecte d under the title Shdha
jo risdlo, "The Book of Shah," and publishe d for the first time by
the Germa n missionar y Ernest Trumpp in 1866. The Risdlo con-
tains thirt y chapters (sur), named accordin g to their musical modes;
in additio n to traditiona l Indian ragas like Kalydn and Kabodh,
Shah cAbdu3l-Latif invente d a number of new modes. Some der-
vishes wh o live at the threshol d of his tomb perform this music in
their gathering s on Thursda y nights, and the melodie s are well
known al l over Sind. 75
72. Motila l Jotwani , Shah  cAbdul Karlm  (New Delhi, 1970).
73. Miyen  Shah  clndt jo kalarn,  ed. Dr. Nabi Bakhsh Baloch (Hyderabad , Sind,
1963)-
74. H. T. Sorley, Shah Abdul Latif of Bhit: His Poetry, Life, and Times (1940; re-
print ed., Oxford, 1966), is an excellen t study, althoug h it underscore s the politica l
and socia l backgroun d slightl y too much. Motilal Jotwani , "Shah Latif: Man and
Poet," Indian  Literatures  6, no. 2 (1963); Annemari e Schimmel , "Schah Abdul Latif,"
Kairos, 1961 , fasc. 3-4.
75. The best edition of the Risdlo is that by Kalyan B. Adwani (Bombay , 1958). An
Urdu vers e translatio n was made by Sheikh Ayaz (Hyderabad , Sind, 1963). The English39°

--- Page 414 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 3Q1
Some of the surs are related to folk ballads of the Indus valley,
like those dealing with Sassul Punhun , Sohni Mehanwal , cUmar
Marui, an d Lila Chanesar . Others describe the mystica l moods or
the ideal lover in traditiona l terminology , like Asa and Yaman Kal-
ydn. Still others sing of the camel, the symbol of the base facultie s
that becom e trained during the long journey toward the beloved ,
or of the seafarer' s wife waiting for her husband to return from
Ceylon; o f the dry tree in the desert, or of the wild grouse. Or the
poet describe s a group of yogis to whom he applies Koranic verses:
their knee s are like Mount Sinai, places of revelation ; their faces
shine in the divine light.
The last chapter (Sur Ramakdli]  is one of the most interestin g
parts of the Risdlo in terms of mystical syncretism , but it should be
read togethe r with the praise of the Prophet in Sur Sdrang, or with
the bitter laments for Husayn' s death in Kerbela in Sur Keddro.
For the Sindhi, however , the favorite poems are those in which
Shah cAbduDl-Latif relie s upon folk tales. Everybod y knew the
contents o f these tales, so that the poet did not need to dwell on the
preliminaries; h e could begin his poems with the most dramati c
moment an d then elaborat e the feeling of the heroine and the dif-
ferent shade s of the soul's movements—hope , longing , fear, an-
nihilation. Sha h Latlf translate d into poetry the cries of Sohni,
whose belove d Mehanwa l grazes cattle on an island in the Indus
and who slips away from her husband every night to swim across
the river to meet Mehanwal , guided by the starlike eyes of the soft
cows, thoug h surrounde d by alligator s and all kinds of danger.
Finally, on e night, Sohni's sister-in-la w discover s her adventure s
and replace s the baked jar that she uses as a kind of life vest with
an unbake d vessel, so that the loving woman is drowned on her way.
And there is Sassui, a washerman' s daughte r whose beauty at-
tracts peopl e from all parts of the country ; even Punhun , the prince
of Kecch in Balochistan , falls in love with her and stays with her.
His father sends some relatives to make the couple drunk and carry
away Punhun ; Sassul, awakenin g at dawn from the "sleep of heed-
lessness," find s herself alone. She decides to follow the caravan to
Kecch, bu t perishes in the desert after her voice, no longer the
voice of a woman or a bird, has been transforme d into the voice of
selection b y Elsa Kazi, Risalo of Shah Abdul Latif (Hyderabad , Sind, 1965), gives a
good impressio n of style and contents .

--- Page 415 ---
3Q2 / SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTA N
love itself . Sassui is, in a certain sense, the feminin e counterpar t of
Majnun i n the Arabo-Persia n tradition .
There is the shepher d girl Marui, kidnappe d by the mighty
ruler cUmar of Omarkot . Confine d in his castle, she refuses to look
after hersel f and tries to become as unattractiv e as possible, waiting
every day for a letter from her family, until the ruler sends her
back to her homeland . Or there is Nuri, the fisher maid who wins
the heart of Prince Tamach i by her obedienc e and sweetness— a
story that can be historicall y located in the late fifteenth century ,
but that bears the distinct flavor of the Indian tale of "the maid
with the fish-smell. " Nuri is the model of the obedien t soul blessed
by the love of the mighty Lord for her constant devotion . And there
is the Hindu tale of Sorathi, in which the king offers even his head
to the minstre l who enthrall s him with heartrendin g verses about
divine lov e and surrender. 76 Rumi, in commo n with many tales
of initiatio n through death, sang: "What is beheading ? Slaying the
carnal sou l in the Holy War" (M 3:2525) .
In the descriptio n of the female character s Shah cAbduDl-Latif
made ever y posible effort to depict even the slightes t feelings and
every chang e of mood. Sassui wanders through the desert, lonely
and hopeless , and eventuall y discovers—wit h a verse translate d from
Rumi's Mathnawl  (M 1:1741)—tha t
Not only the thirsty seek the water,
but the water seeks the thirsty as well.
Or, in the midst of her painful wandering , the poet suddenly turns
to the "interio r journey, " that journey by which she will find the
lost belove d in her own heart—a s Majnun did, no longer needing
the "real" Laila because he had become one with her, or as Rumi
discovered th e lost Shamsuddi n in himself . Sassui reaches the
higher unitiv e stage by dying before she dies. Marui, in turn, is
compared t o the oyster, which would rather die from thirst than
drink the salty water that surround s it; one day it will open to
receive th e raindrop that will become a pearl in its womb.
The verse s of the Risdlo are often repetitious . Some critics have
considered the m rather unpolishe d in terms of classical (i.e., "Per-
76. Ernst Trumpp , "Sorathi . Ein Sindhi-Gedich t aus dem grosse n Divan des Sayyid
cAbd-ul-Latif," Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 17 (1863);
Trumpp,  "Einige
 Bemerkunge n zum Sufismus, " Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgen-
landischen Gesellschaft  16 (1862).

--- Page 416 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 393
sianized") metric s and vocabulary , or though t they were too full
of jinglin g rhymes and puns (thus Trumpp , who thoroughl y dis-
liked Sufism) . Shah cAbdu3l-LatIf di d use the inherite d languag e
of the Sufis; he himself acknowledge d his indebtednes s to Rumi,
and his work cannot be fully appreciate d withou t a thorough knowl-
edge of the differen t currents of Sufism in Iran and India. This is
the point at which most of the Hindu interpreters , and even an
excellent Britis h scholar like Herber t Tower Sorley, have not done
full justic e to him.
Shah cAbduDl-Latif, i n spite of his intense mystica l feeling and
his poetic talent, still maintaine d a certain reluctanc e in unveilin g
the mysterie s of divine love. He usually speaks in allusions , in
difficult an d opaque words, in oblique expressions . This tendenc y
makes his style as complicate d as it is attractive ; it always induces
the reader , or rather the listener , to meditat e upon a verse that is
repeated severa l times with slight yet meaningfu l variations . One
may best characteriz e these verses as sighs, as heartbeat s of a longing
soul.
There is a story that once when a boy came to his convent , the
mystic immediatel y recognize d that he would one day "open the lid
from those  things" that he had kept secret. The young man was
Sachal Sarmas t (1739-1826) , destined to become a Sufi poet second
only to Shah cAbduDl-Latif. Th e anecdot e may have been derived
from the pen name Sachal used in his Persian poetry, namely, Ashi-
kdr, "Open. " His name Sachal,  a diminutiv e of sack, "truth," seems
to be an allusion to the word Haqq, "truth," as found in Hallaj' s
sentence ancfl-Haqq;  and the name Sarmast  indicates that he was
an "intoxicated " Sufi—an d intoxicate d he was indeed! 77
Sachal Sarmas t was a versatile mystic who led a solitary life; he
wrote in Sindhi , Siraiki (the norther n dialect of Sindhi) , Urdu,
and Persian , uttering whateve r came into his heart with no though t
for the consequences . Like his predecessors , he relied upon folk
tales and made Sassul and Sohni his heroines ; he did not, however ,
elaborate th e subject s as much as Shah cAbduDl-Latif did . His Per-
sian and Urdu poetry is traditiona l and conventiona l in style and
expression, bu t in his mother tongue his feeling overpower s him.
In short, jubilant verses he reveals the secrets of divine union, and
in hymnlik e poems he describe s the unity of being in daring words
77. Sachal Sarmast , Risalo Sindhi, ed. cOthman C A1I Ansar i (Karachi , 1958). See the
Bibliography fo r other editions .

--- Page 417 ---
394 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTA N
that are often reminiscen t of the way Yunus Emre and other Turk-
ish folk poets sang of their unitive experience .
I do not know, o sisters, what I really am?
Perhaps I  am a puppet, perhaps the thread on which
it hangs,
perhaps a  ball in the hand of the Beloved ,
perhaps a  yoke with heavy burden,
perhaps th e castle where the king sits and thinks
and talks about many things to get new information .
Perhaps I  am a horse which some rider guides,
perhaps a  wave of the ocea n which drowns the outward
being,
perhaps a henna-flowe r with red coloring ,
perhaps a  rose, the head full of scent.
Perhaps I  am a fountain, filled by a cloud,
in which the sun is reflected and the moon as well.
Perhaps I  am the mirror of God since pre-eternit y
which is beyond all words . . .
perhaps I am not at all!78
Chains of anaphora are used, often in the form of questions : "Who
is ... who is ... who is . . .?" Like all the Sufis, Sachal was fond
of contrastin g pairs of concepts that reveal the basic unity of being:
He is Abu Hanifa and He is Hanuman ,
He is the Koran and He is the Vedas,
He is this and He is that,
He is Moses, and He is Pharaoh .
Like man y mystics before him, Sachal sighed about the affliction s
brought abou t by love; he enumerate d the names of those who have
had to suffer for their love of God:
Welcome, welcom e Thou art—to which place wilt
Thou brin g me? Thou wilt again cut off
a head!
Giving a kick to Sarmad Thou has killed him;
Thou has t brought Mansur on the gallows,
cut off Sheikh cAttar's head -
Now Tho u art asking the way here!
78. Ibid., p. no.

--- Page 418 ---
SUFISM I N INDO-PAKISTA N / 395
Thou has t split Zakariya with a saw, thrown Joseph into
a well,
Thou has t made Shams to be killed at the hand of the
mollas, Tho u usest to afflict the lover.
Thou has t made Sancan bind the brahmins ' thread,
Thou has t made to be slaughtere d Bullhe Shah, Jacfar to
be drowne d in the sea,
In misfortun e hast Thou pressed Bilawal , hast killed
clnayat in the fighting arena, hast sentence d
Karmal 7 9
This poem gives a good idea of the historica l informatio n on which
a mystic in a distant provinc e of the Muslim world could rely,
though som e of the charges cannot be verified . The form itself is
traditional; Ruzbiha n Baqli had devoted a whole paragrap h in his
Sharh-i shathiyat  to the enumeratio n of the affliction s of the Sufis,
beginning wit h the words: "Did you not see what the people of the
exterior meanin g did to Harith al-Muhasib i and Macruf and Sari?"
(B 37). He then went through a long list of Sufis who were attacked ,
persecuted, o r even killed by the theologian s and the "establish -
ment." A t about the same time, c Attar enumerate d long lists of
prophets a s models for the sufferin g of those who love God most
(MT 12; V 6). Rumi accuses God of drawing Jonah and Abraha m
into water and fire; Yunus Emre and the Bektash i poets of Turkey
echo simila r accusation s in recountin g the stories of the martyrs
of love in their poetry. Long lists of Sufi names in the litanies of
some orders , with allusion s to their fates, are sometime s found in
North Afric a as well; the poets establishe d their spiritual genealog y
with all the lovers who had been afflicted or tried by God through -
out the ages. 80
Sachal ha s been called "the cAttar of Sind," and in fact the in-
fluence o f cAttar's imager y is clearly visible in his poetry. This
79. Ibid., p. 377. Sarmad was execute d in 1661; Mansur Hallaj's fate is well known;
but it is unlikely that cAttar wa s killed. Accordin g to Islamic legend, which is based
on Christia n apocrypha , Zakariya (Zacharias ) was persecute d by his enemies , and when
he sough t shelter in a hollow tree, the tree was sawed and he as well. Joseph in the
well is a standard motif in poetry. It has been proved that Shams-i Tabriz! was indeed
murdered b y Rumi's entourage . Shaykh San can is the figure from cAttar's Mantiq  ut-
tayr. clnayat is the martyr-mysti c of Jhok. The traditiona l sources say nothing about
the martyrdo m of Bullhe Shah. Jacfar may be the Prophet' s cousin Jacfar at-Tayyar ,
who was killed in one of the first battles of the Muslim s in 630; his hands and feet
were cut off, and he "flew to Paradise, " hence his surnam e at-Tayyar , "the flying." He
is frequentl y a subject of Sufi poetry. Karmal and Bilawa l have not yet been identified .
80. Dermenghem , Culte des saints, p. 309.

--- Page 419 ---
396 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTAN
implies hi s ardent love for Hallaj, whose name occurs hundred s of
times in his verses. Shah cAbduDl-Latif, too , had alluded to Hallaj's
fate, seein g in every tree and plant the vision of the suffering mystic,
proclaiming ancfl-haqq and therefore doomed to death. The gen-
erations o f mystics who followe d Sachal took over this practice ,
except fo r the member s of the Naqshbandiyya , who have little
sympathy fo r the martyr-mystic . But none of the later mystical poets
can matc h Sachal's intense glow; he is a vigorous poet, and the
rhythms an d energy, the intense yearnin g and love, give his verses
an almost magical quality.
In the Punjab, the literary heritage of Panjabi was rarely con-
tinued by Muslim s after 1800, though in the twentiet h century a
number o f mystica l treatises have been written and publishe d in
Panjabi, includin g a part translatio n of Rumi's Mathnawl.  The lan-
guage was used almost exclusivel y by the Sikhs as their literary me-
dium,81 wherea s the Panjabi Muslim s resorted to Urdu to express
their mor e sophisticate d thoughts , though they enjoyed and still
enjoy listenin g to the simple mystica l verses and ballads in their
spoken mothe r tongue.
Sindhi continue d to flourish after the British occupatio n in 1843.
With the introductio n of a new Arabic alphabe t in 1852, a con-
siderable literatur e grew up that include d mystica l poetry and
prose. The country had always been proud of its mystical heritage.
Did not Diwan Gidumal , the minister , give the invadin g Nadir
Shah (1739 ) the most precious treasure Sind had to offer, some of
the dust of its saints? The provinc e continue d to produce mystics
who wrot e either in Persian or in their mother tongue. Among
them Bedi l of Rohri (d. 1872) should be mentione d as a prolific,
though no t very outstanding , writer in five languages. 82
The attitud e of some mystica l leaders in the lower Indus valley
in the late nineteent h and early twentiet h centuries , notably be-
tween the two world wars, proved quite decisive in the politica l
arena. On e may think of the activitie s of the hurr, the "Free," the
loyal and absolutel y obedien t disciples of the Pir Pagaro who were
gathered firs t to support Ahmad Brelwi's struggle against the Sikh
(1829-31) an d later actively joined in the struggl e against the
British by acts that cannot be called mystical or even religious . The
81. Moha n Singh Diwana , Sikh Mysticism  (Amritsar , 1964).
82. See the numerou s example s in H. I. Sadarangani , Persian Poets of Sind (Karachi ,
!956).

--- Page 420 ---
SUFISM I N INDO-PAKISTA N / 397
hurr even played a minor role in the Indian-Pakistan i war in
This was not the first time that mystical leaders in Sind, or in
other part s of the Muslim world, were engaged in politics or in so-
cial reforms . An interestin g case in Sind is that of Shah clnayat
Shahid of Jhok, which is not far from Hyderaba d (his name occurs in
Sachal's litany). 84 His way of life, spirituality , and justice attracted
a large number , not only of Sufi adepts, but also, accordin g to the
sources, o f slaves and husbandme n from the neighborin g villages .
The Sufi sheikhs and the feudal lords in the country lost large
numbers o f disciples and workers , whereas the dargdh in Jhok
flourished. A  considerabl e amount of land was distribute d among
Shah clnayat's follower s after an unjustifie d attack on Jhok, led by
the Sayyid s of Bulrri. To what extent Shah clnayat reall y aimed at
something lik e a land reform in the modern sense of the word can-
not be detected from the sources, which are mostly unfriendl y to
him; positiv e evaluations , on the other hand, are strongly mixed
with legends . Whateve r his movemen t was, the pious mystic was
accused of conspirac y against the Mogul throne, the easiest method
of blackmail , since the throne was in constant  danger after Aurang-
zeb's death . Large armies were sent to Jhok, which surrendere d
after four months' siege; Shah clnayat wa s executed in January
1718. Bot h Muslim and Hindu admirer s have compose d songs
extolling hi m or describin g his martyrdom ; among them is the
Suhrawardi mysti c Janullah of Rohri, one of the outstandin g Per-
sian poets of Sind from the second half of the eighteent h century .
Mystical speculatio n flourishe d in the Indus valley as it did
elsewhere. A  strong Naqshbandiyy a influenc e in the beginnin g of
the eighteent h century , however , changed the spiritua l climate of
southern Sin d to a certain extent; at that time, Makhdu m Muham -
mad Hashi m of Thatta and his relative s undertoo k to attack all
those Sufis who defende d the emotiona l side of religion as exempli-
fied in the dancing practice s on Makli Hill. Through their literary
activities, thi s Naqshband i group contribute d to promotin g a more
sober mystica l piety. During the same years when Shah cAbduDl-
Latif was singing his moving verses, commentarie s on the Koran and
legends of the Prophet were being written in the Sindhi language by
83. See Mayne , Saints of Sind; Herbert Feldman , From Crisis to Crisis: Pakistan
1962-1969 (London , 1972), p. 165.
84. Annemari e Schimmel , "Shah clnayat of Jhok: A Sindhi Mystic of the Early i8th
Century," i n Liber Amicorum  in Honor of C. J. Bleeker (Leiden, 1969).1971.83

--- Page 421 ---
398 / SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTA N
the learne d Naqshband l families of Thatta. 85 One of their members ,
Mir CA1I Shir Qani c (d. 1789), who was to become the leading his-
torian of Lower Sind, left Persian works, mostly still unexamined ,
that are mines of informatio n about the mystica l and cultural life
of his homeland. 86
With or without the Naqshband l reform, however , the majority
of the masses continued , and partly still continue , in the veneratio n
of their saints, which is echoed in hundred s of simple folk songs
and popula r verses. The exaggerate d veneratio n of a saint's tomb
has been made the target of some of the best modern Sindhi short
stories.87 Th e discrepanc y between the wealth of the shrines and
their guardian s and the poverty of the masses indeed provide s an
impressive them e for social and religiou s criticism . That holds true
not only for Sind, but for other parts of the Muslim world as well.
The neighborin g people s in the Subcontinen t also produce d
mystical literatur e in their own tongues. The mos t importan t period
of Pashto mystica l poetry coincide d with the time of Aurangzeb ,
slightly earlie r than the heyday of Sindhi and Panjabi Sufi poetry. 88
There ha d been a mystical movemen t in the days of Humayu n
and Akbar , the Roshaniyya , so called after its founder Bayezld
Ansari, Pir- i Roshan , "Radian t Master" (d. 1585). 89 He was the
first to apply Persian metrics to his mother tongue, and his Khayr
ul-baydn, a  treatise in rhymed prose, can be regarded as the begin-
ning of Pashto literatur e proper. Pir-i Roshan' s mystica l theories—
a full-fledge d pantheism—wer e vehementl y attacked by Akhun d
Darwaza, th e orthodo x preacher , and Pir-i Roshan' s sons were
drowned i n the Indus near Attock. Yet his mystica l movemen t
seems to have survive d beneath the surface of religiou s life, and
one of the leading mystica l poets of the later Aurangze b period in
the beginnin g of the eighteent h century was Mirza Khan Ansari,
85. Annemari e Schimmel , "Translation s and Commentarie s of the Quran in the
Sindhi Language, " Oriens 15 (1963).
86. Some of Mir cAli Shir Qani's books have been edited by Sayyid Hussamuddi n
Rashdi; other s are still in manuscript , includin g those specializin g in Sufi topics.
Sy.Jamal Abro , Munhun  kdro, trans. Annemari e Schimme l as "Geschwarzte n
Gesichtes," i n Aus der Palmweinschenke.  Pakistan  in Erzahlungen  seiner zeitgenossis-
chen Autoren  (Tubingen , 1966). An English translatio n of this translatio n by E. Mohr
Rahman was published in Mahfil, 196
88. Icjazul Haq q Quddusi , Tadhkira-yi  sufiya-yi  Sarhad  (Lahore , 1966); Abdul
Hayy Habibi , D pashto adabiydto  tdrlkh (Kabul, 1342 sh. 11964), a good introductio n
to Pashto literature .
89. Syed Athar Abbas Rizvi, "The Rawshaniyy a Movement, " Abr-Nahrain  6 (1965-
66), 7 (1967-68) .

--- Page 422 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 399
a descendan t of Bayezid Ansari. In many ways his poetry resemble s
that of the poets in Sind and Punjab; like them, he used the siharfi,
"Golden Alphabet, " to teach his theories , and one of his poems
could hav e inspired the lines of Sachal quoted earlier:
How shall I define what thing I am?
Wholly existent , and non-existent , I am.
... Sometime s a mote in the disc of the sun,
At others, a ripple of the water's surface.
Now I fly about on the wind of association ,
Now I am a bird of the incorporea l world ....
I have envelope d myself in the four elements .
I am the cloud on the face of the sky ....
In the lot of the devoted , I am the honey,
In the soul of the impious , the sting.
I am with every one, and in all things;
Without imperfection—immaculat e I am.90
On the whole, the imagery of the early Pathan mystics shows a
strong inheritanc e from Persian poetry. That is particularl y clear
in the case of cAbduVRahman, lovingl y called Rahma n Baba, a
mystic of the Chishti order who lived during the Aurangze b period
(d. 1709) and is usually regarded as the best mystical poet in Pashto.
As legend has it, he led a life of withdrawa l and seclusion , and his
poetry reflect s a sadness and ascetic feeling that are not too frequen t
in the mystica l poets of this period. His anniversar y at the end of
April is usually celebrate d in a solemn manner . Sometime s it seems
as if cAbdu3r-Rahman ha d carefull y studied the works of his great
compatriot SanaDI; his ascetic verses, his mourning over the tran-
sitoriness o f the world— a theme frequentl y found in Pashto mysti-
cal writing—hav e much in common with the didactic , slightly dry,
and yet very attractiv e style of the great medieva l poet of Ghazna.
Thus his lines about the resurrectio n and the necessit y to prepare
for that day:
Since to-morro w he will rise again with the same
qualities,
Let not God give any one an evil nature, in this world!
That will , verily, be unto him a harvest after death,
Whatever h e may have sown in the field of this world. 91
90. H. G. Raverty , Selections  from the Poetry of the Afghans  (London , 1862), p. 75.
91. Ibid. , p. 16.

--- Page 423 ---
400 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTAN
With an image typical of an inhabitan t of Afghanistan , cAbdu3r-
Rahman compare s the passing of life to the reg-i rawan, the shifting
sand dunes . He was probabl y acquainte d with Omar Khayyam' s
verses, or numerou s poems written in the same vein; in that mood
he complains :
Fortune i s like unto a potter—it fashionet h and
breaketh:
Many, lik e unto me and thee, it hath created and
destroyed.
Every ston e and clod of the world, that may be looked
upon,
Are all skulls, some those of kings, and some of beggars. 92
Again in full harmony with the tradition s of the early Sufis—listen -
ing to the psalms of the created beings without identifyin g them-
selves wit h everything— cAbduDr-Rahman praise s God, whose cre-
ative powe r can be witnesse d in this world and all its marvels :
The earth hath bowed down its head in His adoration ,
And the firmamen t is bent over in the worship of Him.
Every tree , and every shrub, stand ready to bend before
Him:
Every her b and blade of grass are a tongue to utter His
praises.
Every fish in the deep praiseth and blesseth His name,
Every bird , in the meadow s and in the fields, magnifiet h
Him ....
No one hath lauded Him equal unto His just deserts;
Neither hat h any one sufficientl y resounde d His praise. 93
The Persianizatio n of Pashto poetry became even more conspicu -
ous after cAbdu3l-Qadir Khatta k translate d some of the works of
Sacdi and JamI into his mother tongue. cAbdu3l-Qadir's father ,
Khushhal Kha n Khattak (d. 1689), the great warrior poet of the
Pathans, sometime s wrote lovely verses of mystical flavor. The other
Afghan rule r known as a poet was Ahmad Shah Abdali Durrani .
The successo r of Nadir Shah of Iran, he invaded northwester n India
several times , called in to help against the Sikhs and Mahrattas . It
92. Ibid., p. 9.
93. Ibid., pp. 47ff.

--- Page 424 ---
SUFISM IN INDO-PAKISTAN / 40!
was probabl y in his time that a remarkabl e poet tried to express
mystical teaching s in Pashto. This poet was Khwaja Muhamma d
Bangash, lik e cAbduDr-Rahman a  member of the Chishti order,
whose poem s breathe almost the same atmospher e as those by
cAbduDr-Rahman, thoug h he also alluded to the dhikr and the
breath regulatio n that is so importan t for the advance d Sufi:
Thy every breath is a pearl and coral of inestimabl e
price:
Be careful , therefore , and guard every respiratio n well! 94
A deeper study of Pashto mystica l poetry would be worthwhile , and
it would probabl y strengthe n the impressio n that the inhabitant s
of the Afghan hills rarely indulge d in the exuberant , fanciful love
songs and poetical sighs that the Sindhi or Panjabi mystics did, but
followed, o n the whole, a more sober line in Sufism that was fully
consistent wit h the tradition develope d earlier in Ghazna .
A large body of mystical poetry is found in East Bengal, 95 and
here once more the folk songs—so-calle d marifati—are  of exquisit e
beauty, delicat e and full of music. They were sung on the rivers,
and Muhammad , the mystica l leader, appears as the boatsma n who
brings the soul safely to the other shore. The imagery is that of a
country wher e water is plentifu l and has a soft, melodiou s quality—
the soul may be compare d to the water hyacinths , which constantl y
move on the surface of the rivulets and canals, and the heart re-
sembles th e tiny waves on the surface of the water, moved by
changing winds .
Mystical theorie s were also expresse d in the Bengal i languag e
as early as the seventeent h century , when a mystic called Hajji Mu-
hammad described , in his Nurnama,  "The Book of Light," the
problems o f wahdat al-wujud and wahdat ash-shuhud  and the dif-
ferent type s of light mysticism. 96 However , the higher mystica l
literature wa s usually compose d either in Arabic or Persian, and
many of the mauluds  in honor of the Prophet are written in one
of these languages .
In Bengal as in Sind, the Naqshbandiyy a and some more militant
94. Ibid., p. 337.
95. Icjazul Haq q Quddusi , Tadhkira-yi  sufiyd-yi Bengal (Lahore, 1965).
96. Enamu l Haq, "Sufi Movemen t in Bengal, " Indo-Iranica  3, nos. 1-2 (1948). His
Muslim Bengali  Literature  (Karachi , 1957) contains interestin g materia l about Sufi
poetry in Bengali .

--- Page 425 ---
4O2 /  SUFIS M IN INDO-PAKISTAN
mystically inspire d groups tried to curb the overflowin g emotional -
ism expresse d in the lovely folk songs. As a defense against syncre-
tism, the later Naqshbandiyy a has played a remarkabl e role in all
parts of Muslim India.

--- Page 426 ---
EPILOGUE
Khwaja Mi r Dard is a typical example of later Sufi life
and thought : poet and mystic, fundamentalis t and followe r of both
Ibn cArabi and Ahmad Sirhindi , fighter against all kinds of innova-
tion and lover of music and art, he is the complexio  oppositorum.
It is symptomati c of the developmen t of Sufism in the nineteent h
century tha t the emphasi s was placed once more upon the person
of Muhammad . The Indian orders of Mir Dard and of Ahmad
Brelwl, th e fighter for freedom , are called tarlqa muhammadiyya.
Indeed, Sayyi d Ahmad Brelwl had taken pledge from the classical
Sufi order s and also in the Muhammada n way as founded by Nasir
Muhammad c Andalib. Th e North African fraternities , like the
Sanusiyya an d the Tijaniyya , who tried to revive the concept of the
Muslims confrontin g the "infidels, " have placed the person of the
Prophet i n the center of their teaching s and meditations .
In the course of this study we have seen how much criticism was
directed agains t Sufism from the early tenth century on. The com-
plaint abou t the decay of mysticis m become s stronger from century
to century . This may be one reason why the later forms of Sufism
have attracte d comparativel y little interest on the part of the schol-
ars. Anothe r reason is certainly the indebtednes s of the majorit y of
later Sufis to the system of Ibn cArabi, whic h apparentl y left very
little room for independen t theologica l thought . Althoug h a six-
4039-

--- Page 427 ---
404 / EPILOGUE
teenth-century mysti c like Shacrani in Egypt has been studied by a
number o f Europea n scholars , a full evaluatio n of his various con-
tributions t o the history of Sufism and cultural life is still lacking.
The same thing is true for cAbduDl-Ghani an-Nabulus i (d. 1728),
the Syrian scholar and mystic whose commentarie s have been used
by many students of Sufism for a better understandin g of classical
sources.
In recent years the interest in the militant orders in North and
West Afric a has grown considerably . Here one finds—a s in Dard's
tarlqa muhammadiyya—a.  strong fundamentalis m tinged by the mys-
tical theorie s of the previou s centurie s and the use of technica l
devices (lik e common dhikr) by the orders to gain control over
larger circle s of the community . The success of the Tijaniyya 1 and
Sanusiyya2 i n the politica l field indicate s that their approac h is
attractive fo r many of the pious. It is worth mentionin g in this
connection tha t some of the fundamentalis t Muslim leaders in our
century, lik e Hasan al-Banna 0, the founder of the Muslim Brethren ,
came from a backgroun d of strong connection s with Sufi orders: it
was from the Sufis that he learned his methods of channelin g the
enthusiasm o f people into religiou s activities .
The discussio n about the validity of the orders and about the
whole cultura l role of Sufism has extende d over many years. The
general vie w is that most of the orders, in their present forms,
appeal to the lower instincts of the people and can be classifie d as
either un-Islami c or antimodern . There are still many orders alive—
the High Sufi Council of Egypt enumerate d not less than sixty
orders a few years ago;3 they were, however , losing follower s be-
cause of urbanization , though some of them were able to attract
new members . It is typical that among the successfu l ones is a sub-
branch of the Shadhiliyya , which teaches the punctua l fulfillmen t
of man's duties rather than a way to ecstasy that can be achieve d
only throug h ascetic practices .
The fact that the orders were banned in Turkey in 1925 has
1. M. Jamil Abun Nasr, The Tijaniya:  A Sufi Order in the Modern  World (Oxford ,
1965). A careful introductio n to the life and work, and particularl y the mystica l lan-
guage, of a nineteenth-centur y mystica l teacher in North Africa is: Jean-Loui s Mich-
on, Le Soufi Marocain Ahmad ibn cAfiba et son mi^rdj (Paris, 1973).
2. N. A. Ziadah, Sanusiyah:  A Study of a Revivalist  Movement  in Islam (Leiden ,
1958).
3. Michae l Gilsenan , "Some Factors in the Decline of the Sufi Orders in Moder n
Egypt," Moslem  World 57, no. i (1967).

--- Page 428 ---
EPILOGUE /  405
curbed onl y their external activities ; they were, and are, very much
alive beneat h the surface. 4 The loving, veneratin g attitude toward
truly saintl y persons and the interpretatio n of Islam in terms of
mystical experienc e still play an importan t role. Almost everyon e
who has lived in the East would agree with the example cited by
Dermenghem fro m North Africa: a modern man may violentl y
deny miracle s and saint worship in rationa l debate and is highly
critical of mysticis m in any form, but he will show veneratio n at
a sacred place or respect to a person who is reported to be a saint,
or who comes from a noted family of mystics. A number of mystical
leaders in modern Turkey have attracted follower s who, silently
and intensely , preach and practice the message of all-embracin g love
to their friends. Some interestin g mystica l poetry has been produce d
in these circles. 5 The situatio n is similar in other Muslim countries ,
though in some of them the influenc e of the "village sheikh" or
the mystica l leader is still strong enough even to influenc e politica l
decisions. Othe r spiritua l masters—mainl y in North Africa—hav e
been sufficientl y powerfu l to attract a number of European s as
disciples. Marti n Lings's book A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth  Cen-
tury gives a vivid impressio n of this spiritual activity; similar biog-
raphies coul d be written about a number of mystics in the area
between Istanbu l and Delhi. 6 An interestin g exampl e is the faith
movement i n India, founded by Maulan a Ilyas in the 19205, which
combines stric t fundamentalis m with mystica l practices . Popular
mystical movement s can be found in differen t parts of the Muslim
world.7
More tha n once Muhamma d Iqbal attacked the "Pirism " and
backwardness o f the so-calle d "spiritua l leaders " of the Indo-
4. There is a great deal of materia l about modern mystica l current s in Islam in
A. J. Arberry , ed., Religion  in the Middle  East, vol. 2 (Cambridge , 1969). Clifford
Geertz, Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia (New
Haven, 1968) , gives a very interestin g analysi s of Indonesia n and Morocca n Islam.
Morroe Berger , Islam in Egypt Today: Social and Political  Aspects of Popular  Religion
(Cambridge, 1970) , has some useful statistic s and genera l information .
5. For Turkey see Samiha Ayverdi , Nezihe Araz, Safiye Erol, and Soft Huri, Kenan
Rifai ve yirminci  asnn i§igtnda  Miislumanlik  (Istanbul , 1951).
6. Martin Lings, A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth  Century,  ad ed. (London , 1971);
see also ad-Darqawi , Letters of a Sufi Master,  trans. Titus Burckhard t (London , 1961).
7. See A. A. M. Mackeen , "The Sufi-Qaw m Movement, " Moslem  World 53, no. 3
(1963); H . B. Barclay , "A Sudanes e Religiou s Brotherhood : At-tariq a al-hindlya, "
Moslem World  53, no. 2 (1963), about a nineteenth-centur y "sober " order. M. An-
warul Haq , The Faith-Movement  of Mawlana  Ilyas (London , 1972), is very interestin g
on Indian popula r mysticism .

--- Page 429 ---
406 / EPILOGUE
Pakistani Subcontinent; 8 yet a close study of his work makes it clear
that he himself follows quite closely the Sufi thought of the classical
period. A s a thinker, Iqbal turned from a Hegelian-Ib n cArabi
pantheism t o what seemed to him true Islam. In fact, he relied
heavily upo n the heritage of the great masters of early Sufism; and
his treatmen t of Hallaj, with whose work he became acquainte d
through Loui s Massignon' s books, shows an extraordinar y insight
into the phenomeno n of the enthusiasti c mystic who has achieved
an experienc e that every faithful person is entitled to reach, but
which is denied by most of the common believers , who cling only
to the word of the revelation , not recognizin g the spirit. The tension
between th e traditiona l Sufi thought and the fresh, and very authen-
tic, interpretatio n of some of the most exciting sentence s in early
Sufism is one of the truly fascinatin g aspects of Iqbal's thought .
His imagery , like that of most Turkish , Persian, or Urdu poets, is
largely colore d by Sufi symbolism : as much as he detested the kind
of enthralling , "otherworldly " mysticis m that he thought was hid-
den behin d Hafiz's beautifu l verses, he himself used the whole
fabric of Sufi imagery in his poetry, though he often reinterprete d it.
That statemen t could describ e almost every great poet of the
Islamic world , especiall y those under the influenc e of Iran. Even
the work of those who are often considere d to be frivolous , or pagan,
or unreligious , cannot be properly interprete d withou t a thorough
knowledge o f the Sufi heritage . One prominen t example will suffice:
Ghalib (d . 1869), who is usually labelled as a free thinker or "half-
Muslim" (accordin g to his own joking words), is deeply steeped
in the tradition s of the Delhi school of Sufism (just as was true of the
reformer o f Indian Islam, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, d. 1898).
It seems to be a promisin g sign for the survival of the best tradi-
tions of Sufism—fa r removed from stale theosophy , from dangerou s
Pirism, fro m stagnatin g pantheism—tha t there is now a growing
interest in the figure of al-Halla j in the whole Muslim world. It
is, no doubt, Massignon' s monumenta l work that has aroused this
interest; bu t the Hallaj ian traditio n had been kept alive in Sufi
poetry throughou t the centuries . Ghalib's poetic statemen t that the
8. Muhamma d Iqbal, The Development  of Metaphysics  in Iran (Cambridge , 1908);
Iqbal, Six Lectures  on the Reconstruction  of Religious  Thought  in Islam (Lahore ,
1930). Se e the Bibliograph y in Annemari e Schimmel , Gabriel's  Wing: A Study into
the Religious  Ideas of Sir Muhammad  Iqbal (Leiden, 1963), and in Hafeez Malik, ed.,
Muhammad Iqb'd:  Poet-Philosopher  of Pakistan  (New York, 1971).

--- Page 430 ---
EPILOGUE / 407
place wher e the secret of love can be divulged is not the pulpit but
the gallow s can be traced back to Sana 0! and has been imitate d
many time s by Persian and Urdu writers . His descriptio n of the
lovers wh o gladly suffer from gallows and rope—agai n a traditiona l
image—became, durin g the Indian freedom movemen t and even
after Worl d War II, the symbol of those who suffer for their ideals,
be they religiou s or ideological .
The mysticis m of love and suffering—whic h teaches man to live
and to die for a goal outside himself—i s perhaps the most importan t
message o f Sufism today. For some seekers, the theosophica l ap-
proach ma y be easier to combine with a modern intellectua l world
view. Other s will find the small, outward signs of devotion , the
emotional aspect s of Sufism, more attractive . Fayzl, Akbar's court
poet, said :
Do not destroy the Kaaba of the pilgrims ,
for the traveller s on the path will rest there for a
moment.
And a modern French interprete r of Sufism conclude s that it would
be cruel "to destroy the qubba, the sanctuar y of the village," 9 where
so many simple souls have found spiritua l help.
One may agree with this idea or reject it in favor of a modernize d
world vie w withou t the whole firmamen t of saints, which, like the
stars at dawn, is naughte d when the sun of reality appears . But
those who have experience d the dark night of the soul know that
the sun at midnigh t will one day appear and the world will gain
new beaut y once more.
These experience s cannot be communicate d properly , as Ibn
cAta3 says:
When me n of common parlance question us,
we answe r them with signs mysteriou s
and dark enigmas ; for the tongue of man
cannot expres s so high a truth, whose span
surpasses huma n measure . But my heart
has known it, and has known of it a rapture
that thrille d and filled my body, every part.
9. fimile Dermenghem , Le culte des saints dans I'Islam Maghrebin  (Paris, 1954),
P-331-

--- Page 431 ---
408 / EPILOGUE
Seest thou not, these mystic feelings capture
the very art of speech, as men who know
vanquish an d silence their unlettere d foe.
(K78)78)
And "whe n you see the Sufi conversin g with men, know that he
is empty" (K 149).

--- Page 432 ---
APPENDIXES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEXES

--- Page 433 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 434 ---
APPENDIX 1
LETTER SYMBOLIS M
IN SUF I LITERATUR E
One aspec t of Sufi imagery and symbolis m that is extremel y
important fo r a proper understandin g of many writings is the symbolis m
of letters, the emphasi s laid on the mystica l meaning of single letters and
on the art of writing in general. 1
Every Musli m admits the importanc e of the Arabic alphabet—thos e
letters in which God's eternal word was revealed . The Koran itself de-
clares that , even if all the seas were ink and the trees pens, they would
never be sufficien t to write down the words of the Lord (Sura 18:109) .
This Korani c statemen t was frequentl y repeated by the mystics in their
attempts t o describe the greatness , beauty, and perfectio n of the divine
being. Learnin g the Arabic letters is incumben t upon everybod y who
embraces Islam , for they are the vessels of revelation ; the divine names
and attribute s can be expresse d only by means of these letters—an d yet,
the letter s constitut e somethin g differen t from God; they are a veil of
otherness tha t the mystic must penetrate . As long as he remains bound
to the letters—a s Niffari put it—the mystic is in some sense fettered by
idols; he commit s idolatry instead of reaching the place in which there
are no more letters and forms (W 363-65) .
At a very early stage of Sufism the mystics detected the secret meaning
hidden withi n the differen t letters, and the detache d groups of letters
found at the beginnin g of twenty-nin e Koranic suras inspired them to
produce amazin g allegorica l explanations . Most of the great Sufis have
dwelt upo n the topic, and even in distant parts of the Muslim world,
like Indonesia , manuscript s containin g speculation s about letter mys-
ticism hav e come to light. 2 Out of this mystica l interpretatio n of the
letters of the Arabic alphabe t the Sufis develope d secret language s in
order to hide their thought s from the commo n people. The so-calle d
balabaildn language , which has long attracte d the interest of the ori-
entalists, i s a good exampl e of this inventiveness. 3 Even a highly sophisti -
cated thinke r like Suhraward i Maqtul speaks of his initiatio n into a
i.See Ernst Kiihnel, Islamische Schriftkunst (Berlin, 1942; reprint ed., Graz, 19
Annemarie Schimmel , Islamic  Calligraphy  (Leiden , 1970); Schimmel , "Schriftsymboli k
im Islam, " in Festschrift  fur Ernst Kiihnel,  ed. Richard Ettinghause n (Berlin , 1959).
2. Bibliotheque Nationale, Catalogue des mss. Indiens-Malais-Javanese (Paris,
1910), 65:191 .
3. Edgard Blochet , Catalogue  des mss. Persans de la bibliotheque  nationale  (Paris,
1905 £.), 2: no. 1030. See Ignaz Goldziher , "Linguistische s aus der Literatu r der
muhammadanischen Mystik, " Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell-
schaft 26 (1872) : 765. Alessandr o Bausani , "Abou t a Curious Mystica l Language, "
East and West 4, no. 4 (1958).
411

--- Page 435 ---
412 / APPENDIX 1
secret alphabe t in order to understan d the deeper meanin g of the Ko-
ranic word. 4
Even in pre-Islami c times, the poets of Arabia had compare d differ-
ent parts of the body, or of their dwellings , with letters—comparison s
that were inherite d and elaborate d upon by Islamic poets throughou t
the world . It is scarcely possible to fully understan d and enjoy the
poetry of the Muslim world, mainly of Iran and the neighborin g coun-
tries, withou t a thorough knowledg e of the meanin g given to the letters.
The mystic s felt that "there is no letter that does not praise God in a
language" ( W 165), as Shibli said, and they tried, therefore , to reach
deeper layer s of understandin g in order to interpre t the divine words
correctly. "Whe n God created the letters, he kept their secret for Him-
self, and when He created Adam, He conveye d this secret to him, but
did not convey it to any of the angels." 5 The Sufis not only played with
the shape s and appearance s of the letters but often indulge d in cabalisti c
speculations. Suc h tendencie s are visible in comparativel y early times;
they are fully develope d in Hallaj's poetry in the early tenth century .
The techniqu e of jafr is thought to have been used first by Jacfar
as-$adiq, th e sixth Shia imam, whose role in early Sufi thought has been
mentioned ( W 164-66) . Jafr is a speculatio n about events, present and
future, fro m certain combination s of words; it has often deteriorate d
into a kind of prognostication. 6 By countin g the words on a page of the
Koran an d computin g their numerica l values—fo r every letter of the
Arabic alphabe t has a numerica l value—on e could figure out names
and places , dates and events, in the same way as some Christia n Cabalist s
detected historica l events in the words and number s of the Bible, mainly
in Revelation .
This tren d in Sufism and early Shia was develope d by a Shia group
known as the Hurufl, 7 "those who deal with the letters." Their founder
was Fadlulla h Astarabadi , who was executed for his heretica l ideas in
1398; he had follower s among the Turkish and Persian poets and writ-
ers, amon g whom Nesim i deserves special mention . This Turkish poet
expressed th e Hurufl ideas—blende d with extravagan t Sufi teaching s
and an interestin g imitatio n of Hallaj—i n his highly enthusiasti c poems
and, like his master, was cruelly put to death in 1417.
For the Hurufl, the word is the supreme manifestatio n of God him-
self; it is also reveale d in the human face, which become s the Koran
par excellence , the writing throug h which God's secrets were made
visible. Fadlulla h taught that Adam had been given nine letters; Abra-
ham, fourteen ; Muhammad , twenty-eight ; and that he himself was
honored wit h the knowledg e of 32 letters (the four additiona l letters of
4. Suhraward i Maqtul, Oeuvres  persanes  (Paris, 1970), p. 216.
5. See Gustav Fliigel, Die arabischen,  persischen  und turkischen  Handschriften  in
der K. K. Hofbibliothek  zu Wien (Vienna , 1865-67) , 1:192.
6. Louis Massignon , Essai sur les origines  du lexique technique  de la mystique
musulmane (Paris , 1928), pp. 37, 98.
7. Hellmu t Ritter, "Die Anfang e der Hurufisekte, " Oriens 7 (1954).

--- Page 436 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 413
the Persia n version of the Arabic alphabet) . In many cases it is difficult
to deciphe r the correct meaning of his sayings, since his interpretatio n
of the letters varies. His most interestin g theory is that of the letters as
reflected i n the human face; alif forms the khatt-i istiwd, the equator
that, like the nose, divides the human face and correspond s not, as usual,
to Allah, but to CAK; the b points to the fourtee n innocen t martyrs of
Shia Islam and is manifeste d on the left side of the nose. A number of
pictures, mostl y used in the Bektash i convents , show a tendency toward
representing th e names of the imams or similar combination s of sacred
names in the shape of a human face (see BO, Supplemen t 2). Even in
India it was said: "CAH is written twice on the face." 8
The idea that the face of the beloved is like a marvelousl y written
manuscript o f the Koran is widely accepted even outside Hurufi circles.
The prett y face is a fine illuminate d copy of the Holy Book. Man is the
perfect cop y of the Well-preserve d Tablet, in which all wisdom and
beauty tak e shape— a notion whose developmen t shows the change in
consciousness o f a late poet like Bedil (d. 1721), whose contact s with
Indian Suf i circles are well known; he describe s man no longer as the
copy of the heavenl y Koran, but as "a manuscrip t of nothingness. "
On the whole, the poets would agree with a late Indo-Persia n writer:
Your face is like a Koran copy, without correctio n and mistake ,
which the pen of Fate has written exclusivel y from musk.
Your eyes and your mouth are verses and the dot for stopping , your
eyebrows the madda [for lengthening the alif],
the eyelashe s the signs for declension , the mole and the down
letters an d dots. 9
The comparison s used here are familiar . The curved eyebrow s were
usually compare d to a beautifull y written tughrd,  as found at the be-
ginning o f official letters. Shah Ismail, the Safawid ruler who wrote
Turkish mystica l poetry, likened them to the basmala,  the formula "in
the name of God." 10 The narrow , small mouth is constantl y represente d
as a mtm,  the narrowes t ringlet in the alphabe t f: the eyes by the letters
fdd (according to their shape _,), or cayn & (which means both "eye" an
the name of the letter). Curls and tresses are the long, winding letters lik e
ddl, or jlm. Every poet could write a whole poem on the letters as re-
vealed in his beloved' s face. Among these puns are some that may be
almost repulsiv e to modern taste. One of these is the compariso n of the
down on the upper lip with a dark line of writing; the word khatt has
this twofol d meaning . Even the greatest mystics have not hesitate d to
see in the black khatt of their beloved the divine writing; they may even
claim tha t the beauty of this khatt, which appears on the cheek of the
8. Muhammad Nasir, Ndla-yi cAndalib (Bhopal, 1309 h./1891-92), 2:344.
9. Mir CA1I Shir Qanic, Maqdldt ash-shu^arcP, ed. Sayyid Hussamuddin Rashdi
(Karachi, 1956) , p. 44.
10. Quote d in Fakhri Harawl , Raudat as-saldtln,  ed. Sayyid Hussamuddi n Rashd i
(Hyderabad, Sind , 1968), p. 85.

--- Page 437 ---
414 / APPENDIX 1
youthful beloved , is comparabl e to the Seal of Prophecy , which elimi-
nates all writing that had been valid before his time (AD 283).
Rumi onc e spoke of the Koran copy of the heart, the mushaf-i  dil.
When th e beloved looks once at this manuscript , "the signs for de-
clension begi n to dance, and the parts start stampin g with their feet"
(in ecstati c dance) (D 2282). This play with letters has produce d some
of the most charmin g verses in Islamic poetry, and the field is almost
inexhaustible.
A central theme of Koranic mytholog y is the concept of the lauh al-
mahfuz, th e Well-preserve d Tablet, on which the destinie s of men have
been engrave d since the beginnin g of time; the Pen that has written
these verdict s is often mentione d togethe r with it. In fact, the primordia l
pen has become a standard expressio n in Islamic poetry in general and
in Sufism in particular , for everything tha t happens is written with this
instrument an d cannot be changed , since, as the hadlth says, "the pen
has alread y dried up." The poet could imagine that the Pen had written
the fate of the lovers in black (bakht-i  siydh, karabaht;  "black luck"
means, in Persian and Turkish respectively , "misfortune") . He might say
that the Pen of Power had selected only the figure of the beloved from
the antholog y of beauties and drawn his shape in the lover's heart at
the very momen t of creation. 11 The poets would complain , in hundred s
of variations , that the writing of their destiny was crooked , because the
Pen was cut the wrong way.
It is from the idea that fate is written down forever on the Well-
preserved Table t that the Islamic expression s for "fate" are derived—
maktub, "written, " in Arabic; sarniwisht  or aim yazisi, "what is written
on the forehead, " in Persian and Turkish respectively . Fate is also seen
as recorde d on man's face, and the Sufis have been credited in many a
verse with the ability to read the book of a man's fate from the title that
is visible on his face. The lines engrave d on the forehea d gave an excel-
lent illustratio n for this image. The poets might praise the beloved who
could deciphe r the content s of the closed letter from the complicate d
lines on the forehead .
The true men of God are those
who alread y in this world
read the script of the heart
from the tablet of the forehead, 12
said the Pathan warrior Khushha l Khan Khatta k in a quatrain . This
imagery i s very widely used in eastern Islamic areas.
The Kora n speaks not only of the Pen of Destiny and the Tablet, but
also of man's sinful deeds, which blacken the book that will be given
into his hand on Doomsday . But there is one way to clean the record
of one's sins, and that is to weep: Orienta l ink is soluble in water, and
a page could easily be washed off, if necessary . The water of tears, so
n.Fuzuli, Divani,  ed. Abdulbak i Golpmar h (Istanbul , 1948), no. 30, verse 6.
12. Khushha l Khan Khattak , Muntakhabat  (Peshawar , 1958), Ruba ci no. 88.

--- Page 438 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 415
often praise d by the ascetics and mystics , can, similarly , wash off all the
ink of black sins; "God loves the weeping of human beings" (N 299).
Repentance clean s the book of actions: that idea is repeated in differen t
words by hundred s of pious poets in the Muslim world.
The feelin g that nothing created is worth looking at once man has
found Go d is expresse d in the same image of "washin g off the pages"
by Nizaml , as quoted by Jami (N 608):
Whatever exist s from the subtletie s of the stars,
or the differen t hidden sciences— I read it, and searche d every
paper:
When I found Thee, I washed off the pages.
To indulg e in writing and reading nonreligiou s books, or even in the
subtleties o f intricate law cases or hairsplittin g grammar , was, for the
Sufis, to add to the blacknes s of the book of deeds; it was to sin.
The mystic s have dwelt on another aspect of pen symbolis m as well.
There is a famous hadlth: "The heart of the faithful is between the two
fingers of the All-compassionate , and He turns it whereve r He wants."
This hadlth  suggests the activity of the writer with his reed pen, who
produces intelligibl e or confuse d lines; the pen has no will of its own,
but goes whereve r the writer turns it. Rumi told a story of some ants
walking o n a manuscript , looking at the writing , which resemble d
hyacinths an d narcissus , until they slowly discovere d that this writing
was not done by the pen itself but by the hand, in fact, by the mind that
set the pen in motion (M 4:3722-29)—a n argumen t for divine activity ,
which is made manifes t through secondar y causes and then seems to
become man' s own activity . Ghazzali had put forth a similar argument .
The hadlth  of the pen has inspired the poets of Iran and other countrie s
—they saw man as a pen that the master calligraphe r uses to bring forth
pictures an d letters accordin g to His design, which the pen cannot com-
prehend. Mirz a Ghalib , the great poet of Muslim India (d. 1869),
opened hi s Urdu Dlwdn with a line that expresse s the complain t of the
letters agains t their inventor , for "every letter has a paper shirt." 13 In
traditional poeti c language , that means that each letter wears the gar-
ment of a complainan t at court. Since a letter become s visible only
after it is written on some solid medium , mainly paper, it wears, so to
speak, a paper shirt and complains , so the poet thinks, about the in-
ventiveness o f the creator, who has combine d it with ugly or meaning -
less letters , or has written it in an unusua l way or on brittle or coarse
paper.
The heart , like a pen, is bound to write every calligraphi c style, to
turn left and right without resistance . One of the qualitie s require d in
a pen is that its tongue, or even its head, be cut off: the pen become s the
symbol o f the mystic who must not divulge the secret, who "speaks
without tongue. " cAttar, lik e many other mystica l and nonmystica l
13. Annemari e Schimmel , "Poetry and Calligraphy, " Pakistan  Quarterly  17, no. i
(1969)-

--- Page 439 ---
416 / APPENDIX 1
poets, dwel t upon this aspect of the pen, "turnin g on the tablet of an-
nihilation wit h cut-off tongue" (AD 603).
When yo u say "I shall cut off your head,"
I shall run on my head like the pen out of joy.
(AD 508)
Other poet s might compare themselve s to a pen that, owing to its "black
fate"—i.e., bein g immerse d in black ink—weep s the whole day.
In one of cAttar's ghazal s (AD 601) the pen, qalam, is connecte d with
the letter nun (n), alluding to the introductor y words of Sura 68: "nun
wa*l-qalam, N , and By the Pen!" The poet wants to walk with his head
cut off and his hands and feet cast away like the rounde d letter nun.
Nun also means "fish," and the relation betwee n the several meanings ,
together wit h the mystica l interpretatio n of the beginnin g of the sura,
has often occupie d mysticall y minded writers . One of the most amus-
ing version s is that by Rumi:
I saw a Jonah sitting at the shore of the ocean of love.
I said to him: "How are you?" He answere d in his own way
And said: "In the ocean I was the food of a fish,
then I became curved like the letter nun, until I became
DhiPn-Nun himself .
(D 1247)
The mysti c who, like the Prophe t Jonah, has been swallowe d by the
"fish annihilation " (as Jam! puts it) and is thrown back on the shore of
separation feels , after his experienc e in the fish (nun), like the letter nun
without hea d and tail and becomes , therefore , identica l with Dhu Dn-
Niin, the leading mystic of medieva l Egypt.
The detache d letters at the beginnin g of twenty-nin e suras of the
Koran hav e inspired the Sufis with many strange and amazin g ideas—
the a-l-m (alif lam mini) at the beginnin g of Sura 2 has particularl y
puzzled th e interpreters . Read as one word, it means alam, "pain," as
the later poets would hold; but there are several ways of explainin g the
three letter s in a mystical sense, e.g.: alif is Allah, m Muhammad , and /
the symbo l of Gabriel , the mediato r through whom the Koran was
brought dow n to the Prophet . "These letters a-l-m- and h-m are like the
rod of Moses," says Rumi (M 5:1316-30) ; they are filled with mysteriou s
qualities fo r him who understand s their secrets. The same can be said
about the tdhd at the beginnin g of Sura 20, which Sana DI interpret s as
follows:
He has seen from the td all the purities [tahara],
He has made from the ha all the buildings .
(S 235)
The detache d letters td-sln at the beginnin g of Sura 27 point to purity
and lordship , accordin g to some mystics. They are incorporate d in the
title of one of the most intriguin g books of early Sufism, Hallaj's Kitdb

--- Page 440 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 417
at-tawdsm (i n the plural); the title has been imitated , in our time, by
Muhammad Iqbal , who in his accoun t of his spiritua l journey , the
Jdwldndme, invente d the "tawdsln  of the Prophets, " dwellin g places of
the propheti c spirits in the Sphere of Moon.
While som e of the mystics spoke about human activitie s as compara -
ble to the movement s of the pen, later Persian Sufis saw the mystery of
all-embracing unit y revealed in the relation of the ink and the letters.
Thus says Haydar Amull (a s quoted by Toshihik o Izutsu):
Letters writte n with ink do not really exist qua letters. For the letters are but
various form s to which meaning s have been assigne d through convention . What
really and concretel y exists is nothing but the ink. The existenc e of the letters
is in truth no other than the existenc e of the ink which is the sole, unique
reality tha t unfolds itself in many forms of self-modification . One has to culti-
vate, first of all, the eye to see the selfsam e reality of ink in all letters, and then
to see the letters as so many intrinsi c modification s of the ink. 14
Most of the meditation s of the mystics were directed toward the letter
alif, d, the first letter of the alphabet , a slender vertical line (|) often
used as a compariso n for the slender stature of the beloved .
There is on the tablet of the heart nothing but the alif of my
friend's stature —
What shal l I do?—My teacher gave me no other letter to memorize !
That is how Hafiz expresse s an idea commo n to all poets. And his
verses can be interprete d mysticall y as well; for the alif, with the nu-
merical valu e one, isolated and yet active, became the divine letter par
excellence. T o know the alif meant, for the Sufis, to know the divine
unity and unicity ; he who has remembere d this simple letter need no
longer remembe r any other letter or word. In the alif, all of creation is
comprehended; i t is as Sahl at-Tustar i says, "the first and most majestic
letter and points to the alif, i.e., Allah, who has connecte d (allafa) all
things and is yet isolated from the things" (L 89). Before him Muhasib I
had pointe d out: "When God created the letters he incited them to obey.
All letters were in the shape [cald surat] of alif, but only the alif kept its
form and image after which it has been created " (W 166). This idea
was expanded by Niffari, who saw all the letters except alif as ill (W
166). The expressio n "in the shape of" in Muhasibi' s dictum seems to
allude to the traditio n accordin g to which God created Adam cald
suratihi, "in hi s image"; alif was the divine letter, and the other letters
were simila r to it and lost their shape by disobedience , just as Adam,
formed in God's image, lost his original purity by disobedience .
cAttar too k up the idea and showed how the differen t number s grew
out of the alif with the value one and how the letters emerged from it:
when it became crooked , a d (.>) came into existence ; then, with another
14. Toshihik o Izutsu, "The Basic Structur e of Metaphysica l Thinkin g in Islam," in
Collected Papers  on Islamic Philosophy  and Mysticism,  ed. Mehdi Mohagheg h and
Hermann Landol t (Tehran , 1971), p. 66.

--- Page 441 ---
418 / APPENDIX 1
kind of bend, an r (__,) became visible; when its two ends were bent, a 
came forth; and made into a horseshoe, the alif became like a nun j. In
the same way, all the various created beings in the differen t shapes have
emerged fro m the divine unity (V 95).
Alif is the letter of ahadiyya,  unity and unicity, and at the same time
the letter of transcendence . Therefore ,
The meanin g of the four sacred books
is contained in a single alif.
(Y 308)
There is scarcely a popular poet in the Muslim world, from Turkey to
Indonesia, wh o has not elaborate d this topic, attackin g the bookish
scholars wh o forget the true meanin g of the most importan t letter and
instead blacke n the pages of their learned books. For Ruzbiha n Baqli,
the alif points to the absolute , uncreate d unicity and informs the mystic
about the cayn-i jamc, the perfect union (B 94). Since the alif is pure
and free from qualificatio n (M 5:3612) , it can become the symbol of
the spirituall y free, the true mystics who have reached union with God
—the erenler,  the Turkish expressio n for advance d Sufis, are "like alifs,
signs of witness" (Y 524).
Other interpretation s of the alif are possible ; it has even been re-
garded as the letter of Satan, because it has refused to prostrat e itself
before an y but God. As Rumi says:
Do not be an alif, which is stubborn ,
Do not be a & with two heads—b e like a jim.
(D 1744)
A particularl y strange chapter on the meanin g of alif, which is com-
posed of three letters (the a, I, and /, which constitut e its Arabic name),
is found in a book on mystica l love written in the mid-tent h century by
AbuDl-Hasan ad-Daylami . Its very title clearly shows the role of letter
symbolism: Kitdb Qatf al-alif al-ma^luf ilcfl-ldm al-mactuf, "The Book
of the Inclinatio n of the Tamed alif toward the Inclined I."15 In para-
graphs 38-4 0 the author proves that alif is both one and three, and that
therefore Christia n ideas of trinity are much closer to Sufism than
dualist idea s as defende d by the Iranians— a somewha t surprisin g result,
which can , however , be understood , since Sufi terminolog y is very fond
of threefol d grouping s or of proving the basic unity of lover, beloved ,
and love, or of him who recollects , the object recollected , and the rec-
ollection, etc .
Speculations o f this kind have never lacked in Sufism. Suffice it to
mention a  modern expressio n of these interpretation s of the alif by a
Sindhi Shi a author who has counted up the numerica l values of the
three letter s that constitut e the name of alif: a=i, l=$o, /r=8o=in ;
these, in turn, point to the threefol d allegianc e of the pious Shia Muslim ,
15. CA1I ibn Ahmad ad-Daylami, Kitdb catf al-alif al-ma?luf ila^l-lam al-mactuf, ed.
Jean-Claude Vade t (Cairo, 1962).

--- Page 442 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 419
which is expresse d by the letters a—i, "Allah," ra=4o, "Muhammad, "
and cayn=>jo, " CAH"—the su m of which is, once more, in.16
These plays , which may seem strange to a modern Westerner , con-
stitute an importan t aspect of Sufi poetry and can be studied even in
comparatively moder n mystica l works; classica l poetry abound s in
them. Specia l importanc e is attribute d to the connectio n Idm-alif,  l-d,
which, if read as one word, means Id, "no," and is thus the first word of
the professio n of faith. The Idm-alif,  though combine d of two letters,
was often regarde d as a single letter and endowed with special mystica l
meaning. I t is most commonl y a metapho r for the closely embracin g
lovers wh o are two and one at the same time. Because of its shape, the
letters Idm-alif or the word ld$ has often been compared to a sword, par
ticularly the dhu^l-fiqdr, cAH's famous two-edged sword, or to scissors:
"I made mute the tongue of speaking with the scissors of Id" (B 196).
The believe r is expecte d to cut all but God with the sword of Id, i.e.,
with the first word of the shahdda,  "there is no deity but God." What-
ever is created should be destroye d by the powerfu l sword of Id, "no."
That is, however , only the first step in the path of the Muslim mystic -
he has to go upward (bd Id), to reach the Hid, "save God," which is
achieved, i n Arabic writing, by putting an alif before the Id £\. Ghalib,
who was not a mystic but was deeply influence d by the mystica l tradi-
tions of the Subcontinent , speaks of the alif-i sayqal, the "alif of polish-
ing" (whic h is a specially high level of polishing  steel): once man has
polished th e sword of Id so intensel y that it shines with the alif-i sayqal,
he has reached the positive value ilia Allah, "save God." Puns of this
kind are very frequen t in Persian , Turkish , and Urdu literatur e both
in mystica l and nonmystica l circles.
Another combinatio n of which the Sufis were extremel y fond, and
which wa s mentione d briefly in the chapter on Prophetology , is the
connection of alif and mim:
Put a mim into your soul,
and an alif in front of it
says Shah cAbduDl-Latif.17 Th e mim points to Muhammad' s name, the
alif, once more, to Allah. M, with the numerical value of forty, is, as a
Punjabi Suf i had said, the "shaw l of createdness " by which God manifest s
Himself throug h the person of the Prophet . A hadlth qudsl attests: And
Ahmad bild  mim, "I am Ahmad withou t m, namely Ahad, One." The
letter mim  is the only barrier between God, the One, and Ahmad , the
Prophet Muhammad . It is understoo d as an expressio n of the forty
grades of divine emanatio n from universa l reason to man and back
and of the forty days spent in seclusion , which are connecte d with the
experience o f the forty degrees . From cAttar's tim e on, the mystics have
loved the Ahmad bild mim tradition , and it has been repeate d in high
iG.Makhzan Shah cAbdul Latif Bhita^i (Hyderabad, Sind, 1954), p. 63.
17. Shah jd risalo; see Annemari e Schimmel , "Shah cAbdul Latif' s Beschreibun g des
wahren Sufi, " in Festschrift  fiir Fritz Meier (Wiesbaden , 1974).

--- Page 443 ---
42O / APPENDIX 1
literature a s much as in popular mystica l poetry, be it among the Turk-
ish Bektashi s or among the mystica l bards of Sind and the Punjab .
The Bektashi s practice d a special mlm duasi, a prayer of the letter m,
which is said to point to the manifestatio n of the light of Muhamma d
(BO 268) . Ahmad Sirhindi' s daring interpretatio n of the two ras in
Muhammad's nam e should not be forgotten .
The lette r b, the second in the alphabet , is connecte d in mystica l un-
derstanding wit h the created world. It symbolize s the first act of cre-
ation; the b stands at the beginnin g of the basmala,  the formula "in
the name of God," which opens the Koran. Not only the b but the dot
beneath i t could be regarde d as the point from which the movemen t
of the created univers e starts: it is the differentiatin g power after the
perfect unit y of the alif and has often been used as a symbol either of
the Prophe t or of CAK, who claimed , as Shia traditio n maintains , "I am
the dot beneath the b." Its shape «_, shows that "when God created the
letters, th e b prostrate d itself," as Sari as-Saqat i thought. As the letter of
creatureliness, i t prostrate s itself at the side of the unqualifie d divine
unity of Allah.
SanaDI foun d a lovely explanatio n for the all-embracin g greatnes s of
the Koran : it begins with the letter b and ends with the letter s—that
makes bas,  "enough " (in Persian) , and this word shows that the Koran
is enough once and forever (SD 309).
Among th e other letters, one may mentio n that the w—which als o
means "and"—symbolize s the relation between God and creation. 18 It is
the favorit e letter of Turkish calligraphers , who even invented a Pro-
phetic tradition , "Trust in the wdw's."
A special role is attribute d to the h, the last letter of the word Allah
and the beginnin g of huwa, "He." Accordin g to Baqli (B 95), the lam
is the beloved , turned into a lover through its own love in its own love;
here the symbolis m of the word Allah, with its two /s, becomes even
more poignant . Rumi may have been thinkin g of speculation s of this
kind whe n he said, in a wonderfull y simple image:
I made my sides empty from both worlds ,
like the h I was seated beside the / of Allah.
(D 1728)
It is typical of Sufism that Ibn cArabi, whos e Kitdb al-mabddi 3 wcfl-
ghdydt deal s with the mysterie s of the letters, visualize d the divine
ipseity, huwiyya,  in the shape of the letter h, in brillian t light, on a
carpet of red, the two letters hu shining betwee n the two arms of the
h, which sends its rays in all four directions. 19 Such a vision of the
divine in the form of a letter is characteristi c of a religion that prohibit s
representation, particularl y representatio n of the divine. The letter is,
18. Johann Karl Teufel, Eine Lebensbeschreibung  des Scheichs  cAll-i Hamadarii
(Leiden, 1962) , p. 8711.
19. Henri Corbin, "Imaginatio n creatric e et priere creatric e dans le soufism e d'Ibn
Arabi," Eranos-Jahrbuch  25 (ig65):i7i .

--- Page 444 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 421
in fact, the highest possible manifestatio n of the divine in Islamic
thought. Ib n cArabi's visio n conforms , to a certain extent, to a descrip-
tion of the degrees of meditatio n by the eighteenth-centur y Naqshband i
Sufi Nasir Muhamma d cAndalib i n Delhi:
He sees the blessed figure of the word Allah in the color of light written on the
tablet of his heart and the mirror of his imagination . . . . Then he will under-
stand himsel f opposite to this form or beneath it or at its right or left side, and
he should strive to bring himself towards this light .... And wheneve r he finds
himself in the middle of the rank of alif and lam, he must proceed and take his
place betwee n the two lams, and then walk away from there, and bring himself
between th e lam and the h, and with high ambitio n he leaves this place too
and sees himself in the middle of the ringlet of the h. At the beginnin g he will
find his head in this ringlet, but eventuall y he will find that his whole self
has found repose in this house and will rest there free from all affliction and
perilous calamities. 20
Thus, the highest stage the mystic can reach is to be surrounde d by the
light of the letter h.
The mystic s and poets have used a peculiar way of expressin g their
ideas by playing with the first letters of those concept s of which they
wanted to convey the deeper meaning to their readers. When they speak,
in early times, of the / of lutf, "grace," and the q of qahr, "wrath," this
type of allusion is still very primitive . But rather soon meaningfu l com-
binations wer e invented , like those with the letter q (qdf), the meanin g
of which is also "Moun t Qaf," the mythica l mountai n that surround s
the world , on which the Simurg h or cAnqa has its dwellin g place.
The q is mainly connecte d with the concep t of qurb, "proximity, "
and the qdf-i qurb, the "first letter," or "Mount Qaf," of proximity ,
becomes a  rather common expression—especiall y since this mountai n
is regarde d as the station at the end of the created world, the place
where ma n can find true proximity , qurb, on his way toward God
(who, sinc e cAttar, ha s sometime s been symbolize d by the Simurgh) .
Another combinatio n is that of q with qand cat, "contentment" : the
perfect Suf i lives, like the mythologica l bird, in the Mount Qaf of
qand^at. Th e letter cayn was used in similar ways; its meaning is mani-
fold: "eye," "source," "essence"—the word cayn-i cafw means not only the
letter cayn with which the word cafw, "forgiveness," begins, but also "th
essence of forgiveness. "
Such speculation s and wordplay s served the Sufis even in defendin g
highly difficul t mystica l definition s and philosophica l positions . It is
said that Sacduddln Hamuy a regarde d wildya,  "saintship, " as superio r
to nubuwwa,  "Prophetship, " because of the differen t ranks of the letters
w and n with which the respectiv e words begin. 21 But Simnan i opposed
this view, which was in contras t to the general Sufi attitude , again on
the basis of a letter speculation . It became a custom to seek deep mean-
ing in each letter of the words designatin g mystica l states and stations .
20. Muhamma d Nasir, Nala-yi CAndalib,  1:270.
21. Marija n Mole, "Les Kubrawiyy a entre Sunnism e et Shiisme, " Revue des etudes
islamiques, 1961 , p. 100.

--- Page 445 ---
422 / APPENDIX 1
If we can believe the sources , the tenth-centur y Sufi AbuDi-Qasim Haki m
Samarqandi like d this kind of interpretatio n and explaine d the word
namdz, "ritua l prayer," as consistin g of:
n=nusrat, "victory "
m=milkat, "reign "
a=ulfat, "intimacy "
z=ziyddat, "increase." 22
Later the Bektashi s found secrets in the word tanqat,  "mystica l Path":
t=talab-i haqq  u haqiqat,  "seeking of Reality and Truth "
r=riyddat, "ascetic discipline"
i=iyol u din kardesi,  "to be faithfu l in every respect toward
'a brother of the way' "
q=qandcat, "contentment"
t=taslim-i tdmm,  "complet e submission. "
(BO 100 ff.)
In the word haqiqat,  the q might mean qa*im billdh, "subsisten t
through God, " and the t might point to tarbiya,  "education"—i t was
unimportant t o the simple Turkis h dervishe s if they confuse d Arabic
and Turkis h words and spellings .
It is not surprisin g to learn that the Sufis, chiefly the theosophists ,
found simila r secrets in the divine names. The name ar-Rahmdn,  "the
Merciful," point s to God's life, knowledge , power, will, hearing , seeing,
and word—th e seven basic qualitie s of Allah, as Jill had seen them and
as they were usually accepte d in later Sufism. The name Allah was, of
course, interprete d in a similar way:
alif: the Only Real,
/: His pure Knowledg e of Himself ,
/: His Knowledg e of Himself through His all-embracingness ,
which comprehend s the illusionis t appearance s that seem
to be other than He,
the doubl e / plus al is, then, the self-negatio n of every nega-
tion,
the h: huwa, the absolutel y unmanifeste d Essence in His Ip-
seity, and the vowellin g u, the not-manifeste d world in
the Nonmanifestatio n of the Only Real. 23
These ar e ideas elaborate d by the school of Ibn cArabI. Muc h more
attractive i s the simple way in which Turkis h friends explaine d to me
the secret of the tulip and the crescent , both typical of Turkish Muslim
culture: tulip , Idle, and crescen t moon, hildl, are formed from the same
letters as the word Allah (one alif, two lam, and one h) and have, like
the divin e name, the numerica l value of 66.
22. A. Tahir al-Khanqahi , Guzida dar akhlaq u tasawwuf,  ed. Iraj Afshar (Tehran ,
1347 sh./ig68) , p. 47; see ibid., p. 69, for hikmat.
23. Leon Schaya, La doctrine  soufique de I'unite (Paris, 1962), pp. 47, 83.

--- Page 446 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 423
Sometimes th e mystics joked about the attempt s to understan d the
real meanin g of a word from the letters that made it up—g-l does not
make a gul, "rose," and the pain, dard, of true lovers is not expresse d by
d-r-d (S 330); nor is it love that is written cshq. Thes e letters are nothing
but a skin, a husk to veil the interior meanin g from the human eye.
The same interest in the mystical meaning of letters that led to the
strange explanation s of mystica l words and of divine names is evident
in a poetical form known in Ancien t Eastern literatur e and throughou t
the Musli m world, mainly in later times. This was the Golden Alphabet ,
in which each verse begins with the followin g letter of the Arabic alpha-
bet. Ther e is no rule for the verse form; the verses may be written in
long or short meters, with two or five or any number of rhyming lines.
Sometimes, whe n the poet chooses short verses, all the lines of a single
verse may begin with the same letter. 24 It was a form that could easily
be memorize d by anybod y who tried to learn the alphabe t itself, and
that is why Turkish , Sindhi, Panjabi, and Pashto poets loved to explain
their mystica l doctrines and the mysterie s of faith in the form of Golden
Alphabets—the pupils would know forever that kh stands for khudl,
"selfishness," s for sdlik, "wayfarer," sad for sirat al-mustaqim, "the
straight path," for Sufi, and for sdfi, "pure." Sometimes words beginning
with the same letters were combine d in a single verse, since alliteratio n
was a frequentl y used poetical device, particularl y in Sind. We may even
find, in Muslim India, Golden Alphabet s in honor of certain religiou s
figures—a fin e example is theAlif-name  by the most skillful Persian poet
at the Mogul court in the late sixteent h century , Maulan a Qasim Kahi
(d. 1582). This poem is compose d in honor of CA1I ibn Abi Talib and
abounds i n puns and witty combinations. 25 In this kind of poetry, the
imaginative powe r of religiou s and intellectua l people found an outlet
that, thoug h sometime s appearin g too playful, still conveys a feeling
of very serious concern with the mystica l and magica l qualitie s of the
Arabic letters .
The Sufis themselves , as much as they boasted of their disinteres t in
worldly affairs , were usually very fond of letter-writing . The letters of
the great masters of old, collecte d by their disciples , form a valuable
source for our knowledg e of mystica l thought and practice . Even today
mystical instructio n through letters is practice d by some Sufi leaders.
Junayd's letter s are a famous exampl e of the cryptic density of early
Sufi writing . Of special interest are the letters written by Hallaj and
received b y him from his followers ; they were beautifull y written , as
the traditio n asserts, on preciou s material , illuminate d and colored ,
not unlik e the artisticall y decorate d books of the Manichaean s in Cen-
24. A good Turkis h exampl e is Abdtilbak i Golpmarh , Meldmilik  ve Meldmiler
(Istanbul, 1931) , p. 200. For Pashto, see H. G. Raverty , Selections  from the Poetry of
the Afghans  (London , 1862), pp. 61 ff. Sindhi Golden Alphabet s have been collecte d
by Dr. Nabi Bakhsh Baloch in Tih akaryun  (Hyderabad , Sind, 1962).
25. Hadi Hasan, "Qasim-i-Kahi , His Life, Times and Works, " Islamic Culture  27
0953): QQ-^ 1. '61-94; aft/-name , pp. 186-89.

--- Page 447 ---
424 / APPENDI X 1
tral Asia. But Hallaj also knew that the true correspondenc e is spiritual ,
not by exchang e of letters; he expresse d that in his famous lines to his
faithful frien d Ibn cAta3:
I wrote [to you], but I did not write to you, but
I wrote to my spirit without letter. 26
The imager y of letter-writin g was used frequentl y by the Sufis— they
wrote wit h the water of tears and the fire of the heart, and the tears
washed of f what the hand had written (L 249). These are the true letters
that the knowin g people understand ; as Shibli says:
My tears wrote lines on my cheeks,
which someon e has read who does not read well.
The languag e of tears is clearer than that of the written word; and the
red tears— mixed with blood from constan t weeping — form a commen -
tary to the topic of "longing " on the parchmentlik e yellow cheeks of the
mystic.
The complain t about friends who do not write is commonplac e in
Persian an d related poetry. Even in an environmen t in which illiterac y
prevailed, particularl y among women , the motif of letter-writin g and
waiting fo r letters is used with amazin g frequency . In the folk poetry of
Sind the heroine s always complai n that no letter from the beloved has
reached them — these letters are symbol s for the signs of grace that the
longing sou l of the lonely mystic expects from God, which inspire him
with new hope for union. It is natural that, in a civilizatio n in which
pigeon pos t was widely used, allusion s to birds as letter-carrier s are
often found : the pigeon that is suppose d to bring the letter from the
beloved is often connecte d with the pigeons that live in the central sanc-
tuary in Mecca. Thus the connectio n of the letter with the prayer sent
by the faithful in the directio n of the Kaaba in Mecca is understood , and
the pigeon of the sanctuar y may also convey the "letter" of divine grace
to the patientl y waiting Sufi. The traditiona l connectio n of the soul with
the bird, and the designatio n of the mystica l languag e as "languag e of
the birds, " gives this imagery another overtone .
The Sufi influenc e can be seen clearly in the field of calligraphy . The
mystics wh o loved to enter into the deeper levels of meaning when look-
ing at the letters of the alphabe t indulged in inventin g surprisin g forms
from letter s that seemed to be particularl y meaningful . Arabic callig-
raphy is the typical expressio n of a culture that outlawe d the represen -
tation of living beings, and the artists created very intricat e patterns of
floriated an d lacelike plaited Kufi script on domes, minarets , and ob-
jects of minor art. In the later Middle Ages the calligrapher s devised
figures in which the verses of the Koran or words of mystica l import
were represente d in a suitable form. They were written in mirror script,
26. Louis Massignon , "Le diwan d'al-Hallaj , essai de reconstitution, " Journal
asiatique, January-Jul y 1931, muqatta ca no. 6.(LSO)

--- Page 448 ---
LETTER SYMBOLISM IN SUFI LITERATURE / 425
reflecting on e central truth of the Koran twice or fourfold . Or the artist
created animals—horses , amusing little birds—fro m the words of the
basmala. o r the Throne verse (Sura 2:256). In Turkey , the calligrapher s
—who wer e often member s of the Mevlev i order—like d to shape the
basmala a s stork, a bird praised in Turkish , Persian, and Arabic folk-
lore for its piety in performin g the pilgrimag e to Mecca. Sentence s con-
nected wit h CA1I, the "lion of God," could be worked into the shape of
a lion—a figure often found in Bektash i convent s and all over the Shia
world. A beautifu l example of the living force of this mystica l callig-
raphy ma y be seen in a recent painting by the young Pakistan i artist
Sadiquain, wh o has, in the course of his new calligraphi c representatio n
of the Koran, written the words kun fayakun—"'Be\ and it becomes"—the
words wit h which Go d created the world, in the shape of a spiral nebula
of great spiritua l power.
A thoroug h study of the relation s betwee n calligraph y and Sufi
thought woul d doubtles s yield interestin g results and contribut e to a
better understandin g of some of the basic Sufi ideas as well as of Islamic
art.

--- Page 449 ---
APPENDIX 2
THE FEMININE ELEMENT
IN SUFISM
"A pious woman is better than a thousand bad men" (S 271)
says Sana 3!, the Persian mystica l poet who is, on the whole, not too favor-
ably dispose d toward the weaker sex. It was he who wrote that the con-
stellation o f ursa maior, called in Arabic bandt an-ncfsh,  "daughter s of
the bier," points by its very name to the fact that daughter s are better on
a bier than alive (S 658).
SanaDi wa s not the only Sufi poet who expresse d his aversion toward
women. Th e ideal of the Sufi was always the "man" (Persia n mard,
Turkish er)  or the "virtuou s young man" (fata or jawdnmard).  In these
figures the high ambitio n of Sufism was best expressed .
The attitud e of Sufism toward the fair sex was ambivalent , and it can
even be said that Sufism was more favorabl e to the developmen t of femi-
nine activitie s than were other branche s of Islam. The sympath y of the
Prophet fo r women, his numerou s marriage s and his four daughters , ex-
cluded tha t feeling of dejectio n so often found in medieva l Christia n
monasticism. Th e veneratio n of Fatima in Shia circles is indicativ e of
the importan t role that could be assigned to the feminin e element in
Islamic religiou s life.
The very fact that the first true saint of Islam was a woman—th e great
lover Rabi ca al^Adawiyya 1—certainly helpe d to shape the image of the
ideal piou s woman who can be praised in the most glowing terms (just
because o f her differenc e from the ordinar y representative s of her sex!):
"When a woman walks in the way of God like a man, she can not be
called a woman" (T 1:59). To call a virtuous woman "a second RabiV
was, and still is, quite commo n among the Muslims .
History shows , however , that Rabi ca was no exception , though she was
credited wit h introducin g the concept of pure love into the austere as-
cetic outloo k of early Sufism. Margare t Smith has collecte d the materia l
about the lives of some of Rabi ca's contemporaries , saintly women who
lived in the late eighth century in Basra and in Syria. Among them are
Maryam o f Basra and Rihana , "the enthusiastic " (al-wdliha),  and many
others wh o were known as "ever weeping , fearful, and who make others
weep" (N 61). They might even become blind from constan t weeping ,
so that their hearts' eyes might see better.
Some of the female descendant s of the Prophet , like Sayyida Naflsa
i. Margare t Smith, Rabija the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints  in Islam (Cambridge ,
1928), give s much informatio n about the role of women saints in Islam.
426

--- Page 450 ---
THE FEMININ E ELEMEN T IN SUFIS M / 427
(d. 824), excelled by their virtue and piety; her tomb in Cairo is still
visited by the faithful . The same holds true for Sayyida Zaynab, whose
sanctuary i n Cairo is visited so often that it even provide s the setting for
two moder n Egyptia n novels, as Muhamma d Mustafa Badawi has shown
in a fine study. 2
Apparently wome n were allowe d to attend the meeting s of Sufi preach-
ers. The daughte r of Abu Bakr al-Kattani , the mystic, expired during a
session in which Nuri, the enrapture d Sufi, spoke about love, and three
men died with her (N 623). A considerabl e number of women of the
ninth and tenth centurie s are mentione d in the Arabic and Persian
sources fo r their extraordinar y achievement s in piety and mysticism .
And there were even women mystics who were guided by Khidr himself
and receive d spiritua l instructio n from him (N 332).
In additio n to these ascetics and mystics , in addition to these women
who excelle d as traditionalists , as calligraphers , or as poets, mention
must be made of those who were married to the leading Sufis of their
time. The pious Rabi ca the Syrian, wife of Ahmad ibn AbI Dl-Hawari
(N 617), was noted for her constantl y changin g mystica l states, which she
expressed i n lovely verses. In later times, the wife of al-Qushayri—daugh -
ter of his mystica l master Abu CAH ad-Daqqaq—i s noted for her piety
and learnedness ; she was also a well-know n transmitte r of Propheti c
traditions.
In the formativ e period of Islam, the most impressiv e figure among
the marrie d Sufi women is, no doubt, Ahmad Khidruya' s wife Fatima of
Nishapur (d . 849). She consorte d with Dhu 3n-Nun an d Bayezld Bistami
and seems to have guided her husband in religiou s and practica l matters
(cf. T 1:285; H 120). It is said that DhuDn-Nun onc e refused a gift sent by
her becaus e it was given by a woman; she informe d him that the true Sufi
is he who does not look at the secondar y causes—i n this case a female—
but at the Eternal Giver (N 620). The most famous story told about her
is that she used to discuss mystica l subjects freely with Bayezld Bistami ;
during th e discussio n she would lift her veil without restriction , until the
day came that the great saint remarke d that her hands were stained with
henna. Fro m that moment onward free spiritua l conversatio n was no
longer possibl e between the two mystics, for "the world" had interfered .
This stor y has often been told in differen t contexts , and it may well be
that a legendary motif was applied to Fatima, whose figure is, in any case,
rather oscillating . SanaDI tells a similar story: a man crossed the Tigris
every nigh t in order to see his beloved until, one night, he became aware
of a mole on her cheek; that night she warned him not to swim back lest
he drown , because he had left the realm of pure spiritua l love (S 331).
Other Sufi s were not as lucky as Ahmad Khidruya . In fact, the his-
torians enjo y telling stories about saints who were married to perfectl y
dreadful women , the prophet Jonah being the first example of this group
2. Muhamma d Mustaf a Badawi , "Islam in Moder n Egyptia n Literature, " Journal
of Arabic  Literature  2 (1971), pp. 154 ff.

--- Page 451 ---
428 / APPENDIX 2
(Job is also sometime s cited). 3 These stories are more or less explicit illus-
trations o f the much-discusse d problem o f whether or not a Sufi should
lead a celibate life, and the authoritie s in favor of celibacy indulge in
describing th e horrors and dangers of married life. Some of the mystics
were absolutel y antagonisti c to or disintereste d in women , even to the
point tha t they would not touch food cooked by a woman (N 576). Thus,
married lif e could be considered , by some, as a substitut e for the hellfire
the saint may escape when patientl y endurin g the affliction s brough t
upon him by a nasty, misbehaving , or talkativ e spouse (even now some
spiritual director s will tell their disciple s to get married , for "the afflic-
tions that wait for you will certainly lead you on the way toward God") .
Rumi tells , tongue in cheek, the story of Kharaqa m and his wife (M
6:2044-129): A n adept wanted to join the disciples of this great Persian
saint, but when he reached the saint's house, Kharaqani' s wife treated
him very badly and told him all kinds of stories about her good-for -
nothing husband . The young man, disillusioned , went into the forest
and found the sheikh, riding on a lion and using a snake as a whip. That
is how he was rewarde d for the patience he had shown under his railing
wife's constan t pressures .
The wome n in stories like this remind the reader of a tendency found
in both classica l Sufism and medieva l Christianity , the tendenc y to
equate th e "world" with a woman. This world is like an old hag who
paints he r ghastly and toothles s face, even putting some scraps from a
torn, illuminate d Koran upon it to hide her wrinkles . Thus she tries to
seduce me n (M 6:1222-36 , 1268-92 ) and is like "a stinking crooked old
female wh o kills every day thousand s of husbands " (U 39), a lecherou s
prostitute, faithles s and mean, a mother who devours her children . That
idea was expresse d first in the sermons of the austere preache r Hasan al-
Basri, but it was frequentl y used by later authors like Ghazzali , cAttar
(R 46), and even Rumi. On the other hand, a later saying attests, "He
who seeks the world is female," i.e., he suffers from all the impuritie s of
a woman, which make union with the beloved impossible .
The asceti c should not care for this woman "world " but "throw the
stone 'Povert y is my pride' into her mouth and divorce her thrice" (B
472). Essentially , the world is not even worth looking at: "This world is
a bride: whosoeve r loves her, adorns her and combs her hair. The ascetic
blackens he r face. But he who has attained to mystica l knowledg e is
completely possesse d by God and does not care at all for her," says Yahya
ibn Mu cadh (L 39), who is a good translato r of the mystica l attitude to-
ward the things "outside God."
The nafs, the lower soul, which is, so to speak, the individua l repre-
sentative o f the world and its temptations , is also sometime s compare d to
a woman who, by her ruses, tries to ensnare the pure spirit and thus
bring him down into the trap of worldly life. Rumi illustrate s this idea
amusingly i n his story of the enamore d she-mous e who tries to seduce a
3. See Tor Andrae , Islamische  Mystiker  (Stuttgart , 1960), pp. 55 ff.

--- Page 452 ---
THE FEMININ E ELEMEN T IN SUFIS M / 429
frog (M 6:2665 ff.). The fact that the word nafs is feminin e in Arabic
makes thi s compariso n both easy and apt. The "anima l quality" prevails
in woman (M 5:2465) ; the nafs can be regarde d as the mother, the in-
tellect as the father, of man (M 6:1436) . Many a Sufi would join Rumi's
hero in his exclamation : "First and last my fall is through woman " (M
6:2799), whic h sounds almost like a medieva l Christia n monk's sigh.
Though som e of the sayings about women found in the Islamic traditio n
are anythin g but friendly (even a woman's dream is considere d less true
than a man's dream becaus e of her lower intellectua l capacities ) (M
6:4320), th e Muslim s scarcely reached the apogee of hatred displaye d by
medieval Christia n writers in their condemnatio n of the feminin e ele-
ment. Eve was never made responsibl e for the fall of Adam, and the often
repeated Christia n accusatio n that "woman has no soul accordin g to
Islam" ha s no basis in the Koran or in the classica l tradition .
The Sufis were well aware of the positive aspects of womanhood . Some
of the Korani c tales could serve as beautifu l illustration s of the role of
women in religiou s life. The most famous example is that of Potiphar' s
wife as told in Sura 12: the woman completel y lost in her love of Joseph
is a fine symbol for the enrapturin g power of love, expresse d by the mys-
tic in the contemplatio n of divine beauty revealed in human form. The
ecstasy of love leads everyon e who experience s it into the same state as
the wome n at Zulaykha' s table who cut their hands when gazing at the
overwhelming beaut y of her beloved . Thus, Zulaykh a has become , in
Sufi poetry , the symbol of the soul, purified by ceaseles s longing in the
path of poverty and love. Her story was given its classica l poetic form by
Jami; a very fine exampl e in the Turkish-speakin g world is the epic
written by Hamdi (d. 1503), in which Zulaykh a sings her longing in pro-
foundly movin g verses, having lost every trace of self-will in the hands
of this primordia l and eternal love.
The Sufis particularl y loved Mary, Maryam,  the immaculat e mother
who gave birth to the spiritua l child Jesus. She is often taken as the
symbol of the spirit that receives divine inspiratio n and thus become s
pregnant wit h the divine light. Here the purely spiritua l role of the
female receptacl e is fully accepted , and few stories can compet e in tender-
ness with Rumi's descriptio n of the annunciatio n as told in the Math-
nawl (M 3:3700-85) . The veneratio n shown to Mary's alleged tomb
near Ephesu s proves that the deep love for the model of purity who is so
often invoke d in mystica l poetry is still a living force in Islamic countries .
The strong , untiring faith of Muslim women has played, and still
plays, an importan t role in the formatio n of the Muslim community .
The Kora n speaks repeatedl y of the muslimun  wa muslimat,  mifminun
wa mifmindt,  the "Muslim men and women, " "the faithful men and
women." Th e same religiou s injunction s are valid for both sexes, and
one may assume that even in our day women are usually more concerne d
with ritua l prayer and fasting than the average man in a Turkish or
Pakistani household .
Many storie s are told about pious sons who carried their aged mothers

--- Page 453 ---
430 / APPENDIX 2
on their shoulder s to enable them to partake in the pilgrimag e to Mecca.
It would be worthwhil e to study the role of the mothers in the biog-
raphies of the Sufis. Althoug h the energeti c mother of Majduddi n Bagh-
dad!, hersel f an accomplishe d physicia n (N 424; see p. 101), is certainly an
exception, man y religiou s leaders admitte d that they received not only
their first religious instructio n but also their preliminar y training in the
mystical pat h from their mothers . Did not the Prophe t say: "Paradis e
lies at the feet of the mothers" ? A nice story that illustrate s this point is
that of Ibn Khaflf, whose devout mother was blessed with the vision of
the laylat ul-qadr, the Night of Might in the end of Ramadan , during
which heavenl y light fills the world and become s visible to the elect
who have reached the highest illuminatio n (X 205). In spite of his per-
petual asceti c practices , her son was not graced with such a vision.
Whether i t be Farid Ganj-i Shakar's mother in India or cAbduDl-Qadir
Gilanl's mothe r and aunt (N 628), there is no doubt that many elderly
women in the families contribute d to the spiritua l formatio n of some of
the great Sufi leaders.
In this context one should not forget the role assigned by Sufi legends
to the "old woman " who suddenl y appears and warns or instruct s the
adepts in some mystica l problem s (cf. MT 243). And she may be praised
for her high ambition , which induces her to bid when Joseph is sold, for
It is enough for me that foe and friend should say:
This woma n is among those who would buy him—
she has at least attempte d to reach the beautifu l beloved (MT 17),
though sh e knows that her case is hopeless in the eyes of men.
The same tendenc y is seen in the old woman—particularl y the poor
widow—who become s the prototyp e of the oppresse d in Persian mystica l
and mysticall y tinged poetry. Her prayer can stop armies, her complain t
can chang e a ruler's mind (S 557), and her appeals to the religiou s la
are alway s heard, since the Koran teaches respect and affectio n for
widows an d orphans . The "faith of the old women of the Muslim com
munity" i s often favorabl y contraste d with the hairsplittin g discussion s
of intellectua l theologians . Many a simple soul among them found sal-
vation throug h sheer love and faith. How touchin g is the legend of
Lalla Mhnuna h in the Maghreb ! She was a poor negro woman who
asked the captain of a boat to teach her the ritual prayer, but she could
not remembe r the formula correctly . To learn it once more, she ran be-
hind the departin g boat, walking on the water. Her only prayer was:
"Mimunah know s God, and God knows Mimunah. " She became a saint,
greatly venerate d in North Africa.
Quite differen t from this simple soul is another woman saint of the
western Islami c world, a mystical leader who educate d one of the great-
est mystica l thinkers of Islam for two years. This was a certain Fatima of
Cordova, who, i n spite of her age of ninety-fiv e years, was beautifu l and
fresh like a young girl (N 629), completel y transforme d by divine love.
A first and decisive meeting with a woman who radiated divine beauty

--- Page 454 ---
THE FEMININ E ELEMEN T IN SUFIS M / 431
as if she were transparen t may have prepare d the ground for Ibn cArabI's
inclination t o perceive the divine through the medium of female beauty
and to see the female as the true revelatio n of God's mercy and creativity .
He compose d his love lyrics in Mecca under the spell of a young Persian
lady. The closing chapter of the Fusus al-hikam,  that on the Prophe t
Muhammad, center s around the famous tradition accordin g to which the
Prophet wa s given a love for perfume s and women and joy in prayer.
Thus, Ibn °Arabi could defend the idea that "love of women belongs to
the perfection s of the gnostics , for it is inherite d from the Prophe t and
is a divine love" (R 480). Woman reveals , for Ibn cArabi, the secret of
the compassionat e God. The grammatica l fact that the word dhdt, "es-
sence," is feminin e offers Ibn °ArabI differen t method s to discove r this
feminine elemen t in God. His viewpoin t has been condense d by Reynold
A. Nicholso n in commentin g upon a relevant passage by Rumi, who at-
tested tha t the creative activity of God reveals itself best in women and
that one might even say that "she is not created but creator" (M 1:2437) .
Ibn cArab! thinks :
God can not be seen apart from matter, and He is seen more perfectl y in the
human materia  than in any other, and more perfectl y in woman than in man.
For He is seen either in the aspect of agens or in that of patiens or as both simul-
taneously. Therefor e when a man contemplate s God in his own person in re-
gard to the fact that woman is produce d from man, he contemplate s God in the
aspect of agens, and when he pays no regard to the productio n of women from
himself h e contemplate s God in the aspect of patiens,  because as God's creature
he is absolutel y patiens  in relation to God, but when he contemplate s God in
woman he contemplate s Him both as agens and patiens.  God manifeste d in the
form of woman is agens in virtue of exercisin g complet e sway over man's soul
and causin g man to become submissiv e and devoted to Himself , and He is also
patiens because inasmuc h as He appears in the form of women He is under the
man's contro l and subject to his orders: hence to see God in woman is to see
Him in both these aspects, and such vision is more perfect than seeing Him in
all the forms in which He manifest s Himself . (MC 1:155-56 )
Ibn cArabi did not hesitate to admit the possibilit y that woman may be
found amon g the abddl, the Forty (or Seven) in the hierarch y of saints
(N 615).
Ibn cArabi's contemporary , the Egyptia n poet Ibn al-Farid , used the
feminine gende r in his mystical odes when talking of the divine beloved .
The name s of his heroines—Layla , Salma, and many others—become , in
his verses , symbols of divine beauty and perfection .
In Persian literature , the contemplatio n of the divine in the form of
woman ha s been symbolize d best in the originall y Arabic story of Layla
and Majnun : Majnun , completel y absorbe d in his love of Layla, be-
comes demented ; the equatio n of love with loss of intellect , the substitu -
tion of rapture for reasonin g was, as we have seen, a typical aspect of
mystical experience . Majnun sees in Layla the absolut e beauty, even
though th e caliph may tell him that there are thousand s of women more
beautiful i n the world. The eye of love, nevertheless , sees only one
beauty, in contras t to the eye of intellect , which cannot perceive divine

--- Page 455 ---
432 / APPENDIX 2
beauty in created forms (this is the case with Satan, who refused to fall
down befor e Adam becaus e he failed to recogniz e the divine spark in
him). Majnu n sees Layla everywhere ; every brick of her house is sacred,
he kisses the paws of the dogs that have passed through her lane, and
eventually h e become s so completel y united with her that he is afraid
of bloodlettin g because "it may hurt Layla" when the needle touches his
skin. Thi s complet e unificatio n leads to an absolut e isolation—h e no
longer want s to see her, because her corporea l appearanc e might disturb
the absolutenes s of his heart's vision. Majnun , becomes , thus, the mysti-
cal lover who sees God everywher e and has found him not outside him-
self but in the innermos t corner of his own heart.
The other classic example of the role of women in mystica l love theo-
ries is that of the story of Sheikh §an can told by cAttar. Th e p*ious
mystical leade r falls in love with a Christian maiden , leaves everythin g
connected wit h Islam, and herds his beloved' s pigs (but is eventuall y
brought bac k into his old state of piety through the constan t prayer of
his aggrieve d disciples) . Here, the rapture is produce d by a beloved ob-
ject that should, essentially , be repellen t to the pious ascetic. The story
of Sheikh Sancan symbolize s that frenzy of love that is beyond all bounds,
be they religious , social, or communal , a frenzy that defies logical rea-
soning an d carries the lover into a state that he himself would never
have anticipated . Historica l cases of such love occur occasionall y in
Muslim mysticism , the object usually being a Christian or a Hindu boy,
persons wh o have become stereotype s in Persian poetry as well. But in
°Attar's stor y the eternal beauty reveals itself once more in feminin e
form, and the experienc e of Sheikh Sancan is so deep as to change the
whole cours e of a "normal " orthodo x life into sheer surrende r in love.
That is why Sancan exchangin g the rosary for the infidel' s girdle be-
came a favorite symboli c figure in later Persian and related poetry when-
ever the power of love needed to be adequatel y described .
To turn from the field of high mystica l speculation s and classica l lit-
erature bac k to everyda y life: Sufism, more than stern orthodoxy , offered
women a  certain amoun t of possibilitie s to participat e actively in the
religious an d social life. In the later Middle Ages, the chronicle s tell
about convent s where women could gather in pursuit of the mystica l
path or of religiou s life in general . In Mamlu k Egypt, these convent s
had a shaykha who led the congregatio n in service and prayer. One of
those convent s was a refuge for divorced women , who could stay there
until they found an opportunit y for remarrying .
A numbe r of Sufi orders had women attache d to them as lay members .
Although som e of them do not allow women inside the sanctuaries , the
love and enthusias m of the female adherent s is, as a rule, very ardent.
The orde r that granted the greates t opportunitie s to women was the
Bektashi i n Ottoma n Turkey . Here, they were absolutel y equal with
men; they had to undergo the same ceremon y of initiatio n and joined
in the commo n festive meals and gatherings— a custom that has lent it-
self to accusation s of immoralit y against the Bektashis .

--- Page 456 ---
THE FEMININ E ELEMEN T IN SUFIS M / 433
From the earliest times on, wealthy women are mentione d as bene-
factors of Sufi masters or institution s or of whole groups of dervishes .
They woul d endow the khdnqdhs  with food and money (the faithful
BIbi Fatim a supporte d Abu Sacid ibn Abfl-Khay r and his disciple s in
the early elevent h century , and one of Aurangzeb' s daughter s offered a
whole comple x of building s to Mir Dard in eighteenth-centur y Delhi).
The role of women sponsorin g Sufi activitie s deserves special attention ,
and its importanc e should be underlined ; it was in this field that pious,
well-to-do wome n found an outlet for their energies and could do much
good in social service, in foundin g khdnqdhs,  or in contributin g to the
growth of extant facilities for the dervish community . As a reward for
their help , they might find consolatio n and spiritua l uplift in the gather-
ings of the mystics . These kinds of feminin e activities—suc h as looking
after individua l mystics, inviting Sufi gathering s to their homes—ca n
still be witnesse d in some parts of the Muslim world.
Names of women saints are found throughou t the world of Islam,
though onl y few of them have been entered into the official annals.
But the popular imaginatio n often invente d tender legends that even-
tually resulte d in the emergenc e of a new woman saint. Anatolia can
boast of a large number of small shrines where more or less historica l
women ar e buried—simpl e village girls and noble virgins, whose very
names ofte n suggest sad or romanti c stories. They are visited by women
to expres s special wishes connecte d with conjuga l life, children , and
similar problems . The same is true in Iran. North Africa is also rich in
sanctuaries devote d to women saints; but the area in which women
saints flourishe d most is probabl y Muslim India. Suffice it to mentio n
Shah Jihan' s eldest daughte r Jihanar a who, together with her luckless
brother Dar a Shikoh, joined the Qadiriyy a and was highly praised by
her maste r Molla Shah. Her writing s prove her deep understandin g of
mystical problems . The sister of Jihanara' s and Dara's first mystica l
guide Mia n Mir, Bibi Jamal Khatun (d. 1639), was one of the outstand -
ing saints of the Qadiriyy a order during its formativ e period in the
Punjab.
In all the province s of Muslim India and Pakista n one may see shrines
of women saints to which men are not admitte d (which is true for other
parts of the Islamic world as well). I vividly remembe r my visit to one
such smal l shrine in Multan , decorate d with lovely blue and white tiles;
the cheerfu l women in charge of the tomb were no less greedy than the
guardians i n many other sacred places.
The provinc e of Sind, generall y famous for its saint worship , is par-
ticularly ric h in legends connecte d with women saints, as the critical ob-
server Richar d Burton long ago observed : "To the credit of the Sindhi
it must be said that they do not refuse to admit the religiou s merits of
the softer sex."4 He speaks of the faqlrdnl (feminine for faqtr): "a few
of them occasionall y rise to the high rank of a murshid";  and his remarks
4. Sir Richard Burton , Sind and the Races That Inhabit the Valley of the Indus
(London, 1851) , p. 230.

--- Page 457 ---
434 /  APPENDI X 2
about one of the most famous saints in the province , Bibi Fatima Haj-
rani, a hdfiza who performe d many miracles , are corroborate d by the
numerous book s devoted by Sindhi scholars to the religiou s life of their
country. A s elsewher e in the Muslim world, we find in Sind whole groups
of women saints, like the haft caflfa, "the Seven Chaste," who escaped a
group of attackin g soldiers and were swallowe d by the earth before their
virtue coul d be touched , or the mukhaddardt-i  abddliyya,  "the veiled
women in the rank of abddl," and countles s others. 5
In the province of Sind, as well as in Punjab, a special aspect of mysti-
cal appreciatio n of women can be observe d that is rarely encountere d in
other part s of the Muslim world, i.e., the representatio n of the longing
soul in the form of a woman. Now and then, as has been pointed out, the
image of love between two men—s o frequen t in Persian poetry—wa s
changed int o a love of the divine as symbolize d in woman ; but a repre-
sentation o f the longing soul in the image of a woman occurs only rarely,
as in the Korani c cases of Zulaykh a and Mary. In the western part of
Muslim India , however—fro m Sind to Kashmir—th e poets followe d the
Hindu tradition , which describe s the soul as the longing girl, a faithful
wife, or a loving bride. The classica l example in Hinduis m is the legend
of Krishn a and the gopis, the cowherd-girl s (not to mentio n the whole
complex o f Shakti mysticis m in Indian tradition) . Sikh mysticism , too,
has adopte d this imagery . The ginan— sacred song s of the Ismaili com-
munity o f Indo-Pakistan—als o depict the soul as a loving female. The
earliest Urdu-writin g Sufi poets—lik e Sayyid Muhamma d JIw Jan in the
seventeenth century—kne w this bridal symbolism ; but it is used mostly
in the mysticall y interprete d folk tales of Sind and the Punjab .
The tragi c heroine s of the Sindhi and Panjab i folk tales—lik e Hlr,
Sassui, SohnI , and many others—represen t the human soul in search of
the beloved , a beloved to whom she can be united only by endless suf-
fering an d eventuall y through death on the Path. The disobedien t
woman—the lowe r soul—sit s in her lowly hut, covered with rags, wait-
ing for her husband to come and veil her once more in his inexhaustibl e
mercy and lovingkindness ; the faithful wife expects His return from dis-
tant islands , to bring preciou s gifts and spices, i.e., the graces He bestows
upon thos e who love Him to the exclusio n of everythin g else. Even in
the popula r poetical genre of the bdrdmdsa,  poems dealing with the
peculiarities o f the twelve months and the feeling of the lover in each
of these months, or in the "Golden Alphabets " compose d by Sindhi and
Panjabi fol k poets, the soul is the bride and God—o r the Prophe t Mu-
hammad—the longed-fo r bridegroom . This symbolis m allows the poet
to give delicate expressio n to those sentiment s of love, yearning , fear,
and hope that constitut e the main topics of classical Sufi poetry in a lan-
guage tha t overflow s with tendernes s and intense , genuine longing . The
Western reader—use d to the imagery of the "Song of Songs" and to
medieval Christia n bridal mysticism—ca n more easily appreciat e and en-
5. Icjazul Haq q Quddusi , Tadhkira-yi  suftyd-yi  Sind (Karachi , 1959), p. 334; see
Aczam Tattawi , Tuhfat at-tahirln,  ed. B. A. Durran i (Karachi , 1956), pp. 91, 138, 175.

--- Page 458 ---
THE FEMININE ELEMENT IN SUFISM / 435
joy these expression s of Sufi experienc e than he can the usual symbolis m
of Persian and Turkish mystica l poetry.
It is interestin g to note how one of the Indo-Persia n mystics , Mir
Dard's father , Muhamma d Nasir cAndal!b, use d this bridal symbolis m
in his Persian prose work Ndla-yi QAndallb. Nasir cAndalib thought very
highly of pious women , some of whom "have surpasse d many men in
learning an d mystica l knowledg e and love and charity." 6 He is sure that
they, too, will be blessed with the vision of God in the otherworld . But
he, too, held that the wife should regard her husband as the representa -
tive of the Lord, and he quotes the alleged Propheti c tradition : "If it
were permissibl e to prostrat e oneself before anyone but God, I would
say that the wives should prostrat e themselve s before their husbands " 7—
a sentenc e that is reminiscen t of the Hindu ideals of marriage , accord-
ing to which the husband is, indeed, the representativ e of divine power.
In an allegory , Muhamma d Nasir confront s his readers with this idea.
Dwelling upo n the traditiona l theory of man as the place of manifesta -
tion of the various divine names and as microcosmos , he uses these ideas
in the context of bridal mysticism : in the momen t of the consummatio n
of marriage , the virgin recognize s in her husband the qualitie s of tre-
mendous majest y instead of the mercy she had seen in him before ; but
he explain s to her that this seeming cruelty of his of woundin g her body
is nothing but the proof of highest love and "naked union." 8 Here, the
Indian traditio n of the bridal soul and the Muslim traditio n of union
through complet e surrende r in sufferin g are blended in a strange way.
It is remarkabl e that in modern times Sufi teaching is, to a large ex-
tent, carrie d on by women again. Not only does the interest in the mysti-
cal path—modernize d as it may be—apparentl y appeal more to women ,
who hope to find a more "romantic " or poetic expressio n of religiou s
feeling tha n that offered by traditiona l religiou s forms, but some of the
most genuin e representative s of mystical tradition , director s of souls, in
Istanbul an d Delhi (and probabl y in other places as well) are women ,
who exert a remarkabl e influenc e upon smaller or larger groups of seek-
ers who find consolatio n and spiritua l help in their presence .
The verse about Rabi ca quoted by Jam! (N 615)—wh o was, in general ,
not too favorabl y inclined to women—i s still valid in this respect:
If all women were like as the one we have mentioned ,
then wome n would be preferre d to men.
For the feminin e gender is no shame for the sun,
nor is the masculin e gender an honor for the crescen t moon.
6. Muhammad Nasir, Ndla-yi CAndalib (Bhopal, 1309 h./1891-92), 1:832.
7. Ibid., 1:578.
8. Ibid., 1:560.

--- Page 459 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 460 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
cAbdus-§abur, Salah . Mcfsat al-Halldj.  Beirut, 1964. In Arabic. Trans-
lated by K. J. Semaan as Murder in Baghdad.  Leiden, 1972.
Abd el-Haq q el-BadisI. El-Maqsad  (Vies des saints du Rif). Translate d by
Gabriel S . Colin. Paris, 1926.
Abd El-Jalil , J. M. "Amour de la sincerit e d'al-Gazzali. " In Melanges
Louis Massignon.  Vol. i. Damascus , 1956.
Abdel Kader , A. H. The Life, Personality  and Writings  of al-Junayd.
Gibb Memoria l Series, n.s. 22. London, 1962.
Abdullah, Dr . Syed. Naqd-i Mir. Lahore, 1958. In Urdu.
cAbdul Hakim , Khalifa. The Metaphysics  of Rumi. Lahore, n.d.
cAbdul Haqq , Maulvi. Urdu ki nashw u numd men Sufiyd-i kirdm kd
kdm. Karachi , 1953. In Urdu.
cAbdul Qadi r al-Jilam . Al-fath ar-rabbdnl.  Cairo, 1960. In Arabic.
Futuh al-ghayb.  Translate d by M. Aftab ud-Din Ahmad . La-
hore, n.d.
cAbdul Qadi r Tattawi , Sayyid. Hadlqat  al-auliyd.  Edited by Sayyid Hus-
samuddin Rashdi . Hyderabad , Sind, 1967. In Persian .
Abro, Jamal . Munhun  kdro. In Sindhi . Translate d by Annemari e
Schimmel a s "Geschwarzte n Gesichts. " In Aus der Palmwein-
schenke: Pakistan  in Erzdhlungen  seiner zeitgenossischen  Autoren.
Tubingen, 1966. English translation by E. Mohr Rahman in Mahfil
A Quarterly  of South Asian Literature,  1969.
Abun Nasr , Jamil M. The Tijaniya:  A Sufi Order in the Modern  World.
Oxford, 1965 .
Abu Nu caym. See Isfahan! , Abu Nucaym al-.
Affifi, Abu^Ala 3. Al-maldmatiyya  wa^s-sufiyya  wa ahl al-futuwwa.
Cairo, 1945 . In Arabic.
. The Mystical  Philosophy  of Muhyid'Dln  Ibnul- cArabi. Cam -
bridge, 1936 .
At-tasawwuf: ath-thaurat  ar-ruhiyya  fl^l-Isldm.  Cairo, 1963. In
Arabic.
AflakI, Shamsaddi n Ahmad al-. Mandqib  al-cdrif~m. 2  vols. Ankara ,
1959-61. I n Persian . Turkish translation : Ariflerin  menkibeleri.
Edited b y Tahsin Yazici. Ankara , 1964.
Ahmad, Aziz . An Intellectual  History of Islam in India. Edinburgh ,
1969-
. "Politica l and Religiou s Ideas of Shah Wallulla h of Delhi."
Moslem World  52, no. i (1962).
"Religious an d Politica l Ideas of Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi. "
Rivista degli  studi orientali  36 (1961).
437

--- Page 461 ---
438 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment.  Oxford,
1964.
-. "The Sufi and the Sultan in Pre-Mugha l Muslim India." Der
Islam 38 (1963).
-. "Sufismu s und Hindumystik. " Saeculum  15, no. i (1964).
Ahmad, Zubaid . The Contribution  of Indo-Pakistan  to Arabic Litera-
ture, ad ed. Lahore, 1968.
Ahuya, Yo g Dhyan. "Iraqi in India." Islamic Culture,  1958.
Aini, Mehme d Ali. Un grand saint de I'Islam: Abd al-Kadir  Guilani.  zd
ed. Paris, 1967.
Akhtar, Waheed . Khwaja Mir Dard, tasawwuf  aur shairi. Aligarh ,
1971. In Urdu.
Akkag, Turgut . Ozkaynak.  Ankara, 1957. In Turkish .
Aktay, Sali h Zeki. Hallac-t Mansur.  Istanbul , 1942. In Turkish .
Algar, Hamid . "Some Notes on the Naqshband i Tariqat in Bosnia. " Die
Welt des Islams, n.s. 13, nos. 3-4 (1971).
Ali, Ahmad . Twilight  in Delhi. Oxford, 1966.
Ali, Meer Hassan. Observations  on the Mussulmauns  of India. 2 vols.
London, 1832 .
CA1I ibn Husay n Waciz-i al-Kashifi . Rashahdt  cayn al-haydt.  Kanpur ,
1291 sh./igi2 . In Persian . Much more in use is the Turkish transla-
tion: Rashahdt cayn ^al-haydt. Istanbul, 1291 h./1874-75. It contains
many othe r Naqshband i treatises at the margin.
Amedroz, Henr y Frederick . "Notes on Some Sufi Lives." Journal  of the
Royal Asiatic  Society, 1912.
Amir Khurd . Siyar al-auliyd*.  Delhi, 1309 h./1891-92 . In Persian .
Amir Khusrau . Dlwdn-i  kdmil. Edited by Mahmu d Derwish . Tehran,
1343 sh./i964 . In Persian .
Anawati, G.-C. , and Gardet , Louis. Mystique  musulmane.  Paris, 1961.
cAndalib, Muhamma d Nasir. Ndla-yi  cAndallb. 2  vols. Bhopal, 1309 h./
1891-92. I n Persian .
Andrae, Tor . Die person Muhammads  in lehre und glauben  seiner
gemeinde. Stockholm , 1918.
. I Myrtentrddgdrden. Uppsala, 1947. In Swedish. Translate
into Germa n by Hans Helmhar t Kanus as Islamische  Mystiker.
Stuttgart, 1960 .
-. "Zuhd und Monchtum. " Le monde oriental 25 (1931).
Andre"e, P . J. Confreries  religieuses  musulmans.  Algiers, 1956.
Ansari, cAbdullah-i. Th e Invocations  of Shaikh Abdullah  Ansari. Trans-
lated by Jogendr a Singh. 3d ed. London, 1959.
. Mandzil as-sd^irln.  Edited and translate d by Serge de Laugier de
Beaureceuil. Cairo , 1962. In Arabic.
-. Mundjdt  u nasd^ih. Berlin, 1925. In Persian .
Ansari, A . S. Bazmee . "Sayyid Muhamma d Jawnpur i and His Move-
ment." Islamic  Studies 2 (1963).
Antes, Peter . Das Prophetenwunder  in der friihen APariya bis al-Gazdll.
Freiburg, 1970 .

--- Page 462 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 439
. Zur Theologie der Shia. Eine Untersuchung des Gdmic al
wa manba c al-anwdr  von Sayyid Haidar Amoll. Freiburg, 1971.
cAqueel, Shafi c. Pan jab rang. Lahore, 1968. In Urdu.
Araz, Nezihe . Anadolu Evliyalan.  Istanbul, 1958. In Turkish .
Arberry, A . J. Aspects of Islamic Civilization.  Ann Arbor, 1967.
. Classical  Persian Literature.  London, 1958.
. An Introduction  to the History of Sufism. London, 1942.
. "Junaid. " Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1935.
. Sufism: An Account  of the Mystics  of Islam. London, 1950.
, ed. The Mystical  Poems of Ibn al-Fdrid.  Chester Beatty Mono-
graphs, no . 4. London, 1954.
. The Mystical  Poems of Ibn al-Fdrid.  Dublin, 1956.
.Pages from  the "Kitdb al-Luma c." London , 1947. From the
Bankipore manuscript .
. Religion  in the Middle East. 2 vols. Cambridge , 1969.
, trans. Discourses  of Rumi. London, 1961.
. The Doctrine  of the Sufis. Cambridge , 1935. Translatio n of
KalabadhFs Kitdb  at-ta^arruf.
. More Tales from the Mathnawi.  London, 1963.
. Muslim Saints and Mystics.  London, 1964. Excerpts from At-
tar's Tadhkirat  al-auliyd.
. Mystical  Poems of Rumi. Chicago, 1968.
. The "Rubd^lydt"  of Jaldluddln  Rumi. London, 1959.
.A Sufi Martyr. London, 1969. Translatio n of cAynuDl-Qudat's
Apology.
-. Tales from the Mathnawi. London, 1961.
Archer, J .
 C. Mystical  Elements  in Mohammad.  New Haven , 1924.
Ardalan, Nader , and Laleh Bakhtiar . The Sense of Unity: The Sufi Tra-
dition in Persian  Architecture.  Chicago, 1973.
cArifi. "Gu  u jaugdn," The Ball and the Polo-Stick,  or Book of Exstasy.
Edited an d translate d by Robert Scott Greenshields . London , 1932.
Arnaldez, Roger . Hallaj ou la religion  de la croix. Paris, 1964.
Arnold, Si r Edwin. Pearls of the Faith, or Islam's Rosary. London, 1882.
Arnold, Sir Thomas. The Preaching of Islam. 1896. Reprint. Lahore,
i956-
.
 "Saints, Muhammadan , India." In Encylopedia  of Religion
and Ethics,  edited by James Hastings , vol. 11, pp. 68-73. 1908-27 .
Aslah, Muhammad. Tadhkira-yi shucard-yi Kashmir. Edited by Sayyid
Hussamuddin Rashdi . 5 vols. Karachi, 1967-68. In Persian .
Ate§, Siileyman . Sulemi ve tasavvufi  tefsiri. Istanbul , 1969. In Turkish .
cAttar, Farlduddm . The Conference  of the Birds. Translate d by C. S.
Noth. 1954 . Paperback . Berkeley , 1971.
. Dlwan-l qasd^id wa ghazaliydt. Edited by Sacid Nafisi. Tehran,
1339 sh./i96o .
 In Persian .
-. Ildhlndme,  Die Gesprdche  des Konigs mit seinen sechs Sohnen.
Edited by Hellmu t Ritter. Leipzig, 1940. In Persian .

--- Page 463 ---
440 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. Mantiq at-tayr. Edited by M. Jawad Shakur. Tehran, 1962. I
Persian.
. Musibatndme. Edited by N. Fisal. Tehran, 1338 sh./ig5g.
Persian.
. Pandname. Edited by Silvestre de Sacy. 
.
 Tadhkirat  al-auliya?.  Edited by Reynold A. Nicholson . 2 vols.
1905-7. Reprint . London and Leiden, 1959. In Persian .
Ushturndme. Edite d by Mahdi Muhaqqiq . Tehran, 1339 sh./
1960. In Persian .
Attas, Sye d Muhamma d Naguib al-. The Mysticism  of Hamza al-Fansurt.
Kuala Lumpur , 1970.
Aubin, Jean. Materiaux pour la biographic de Shah Nicmatulldh Wall
Kermdnt. Tehra n and Paris, 1956.
Aurdd-i Mauldnd.  Istanbul Universites i Kiitiiphanesi , Arab. 148. In Ar-
abic. A collection of prayers ascribed to Jalaludd m Rumi.
cAynuDl-Qudat Hamadhani. Ahwal u dthdr. Edited by cAfl£ cUsayran.
Tehran, 133 8
 sh./ig59. In Persian .
. Lawa'ih.  Edited by Rahlm Farmanish . Tehran, 1337
In Persian .
Ayverdi, Samiha . Istanbul Geceleri.  Istanbul, 1952. In Turkish .
Ayverdi, Samiha ; Araz, Nezihe; Erol, Safiye; and Huri, Sofi. Kenan Rifai
veyirminci asnn  i§igmda Miislumanlik.  Istanbul, 1951. In Turkish .
Aczam Tattawi , Muhammad . Tuhfat at-tdhirm.  Edited by Badr-i Alam
Durrani. Karachi , 1956. In Persian .
Baba Tahir . The Lament  of Baba Tdhir, Being the "Rubd^iyat"  of Baba
Tahir Hamadani cUrydn. Edited and translated by Edward Heron-
Allen and Elizabet h Curtis Brenton . London, 1902.
Babinger, Franz . "Schejch Bedr ad-din, der Sohn des Richter s von Si-
mawna." De r Islam 2 (1912).
 . "Zur Friihgeschichte des Naqschbendi-Ordens." Der Isla
Badawi, Abdu r
 Rahman . "Les points de rencontr e de la mystiqu e musul-
mane et de 1'existentialisme. " Studia Islamica  27 (1967).
- .  Shdhidat al-cishq al-ildhi,  Rdbfa aFAdawiyya.  Cairo, 1946.
Arabic.
- .  Shatahdt as-siifiyya,  juz* i: Abu Yazld al-Bistdml.  Cairo, 1949.
Arabic.
Badawi, Muhamma d Mustafa . "Islam in Modern Egyptia n Literature. "
Journal o f Arabic Literature  2 (1971).
Badisi, el- . See cAbd el-Haq q el-Badisi .
Bagley, R . R. C., trans. Ghazdll's  Book of Counsel  for Kings (naslhat al-
muluk). Oxford , 1964.
Bahajuddm Walad . Ma^drif. Edited by Badi cuz-Zaman Furuzanfar . Teh-
ran, 1338 sh./i959 . In Persian .
Bakharzi, A . M. Yahya al-Kubraw i al-. Aurdd al-ahbdb  wa fusu$ al-dddb.
Edited by Iraj Afshar. Tehran, 1347 sh./ig68 . In Persian .sh./i958-
(I9*ti> H^g^S)-

--- Page 464 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 441
Baljon, J. M. S. "Psycholog y as Apprehende d and Applied by Shah Wall
Allah Dihlawi. " Acta Orientalia  Neerlandica,  1971.
, trans. A Mystical Interpretation  of Prophetic  Tales by an In-
dian Muslim:  Shah Wall Allah's "ta^wll al-ahddlth."  Leiden, 1973.
Baloch, Dr . Nabi Bakhsh, ed. Madahun  ayn mundjdtun.  Karachi, 1959.
In Sindhi .
. Tih akaryun.  Hyderabad , Sind, 1962. In Sindhi.
Bannerth, Ernst . "Das Buch der 40 Stufen von cAbd al-Kari m al-GIli. "
Sitzungsberichte der  Oesterreichischen  Akademie  der Wissenschaf-
ten, philologisch-historiche  Klasse 230, no. 3. Vienna, 1956.
. "La Khalwatiyy a en Egypte. " Melanges  de I'institut  domini-
caine d'etudes  orientales  du Caire 8 (1964-66) .
-, trans. Der Pfad der Gottesdiener.  Salzburg , 1964. Al-Ghazzali' s
Minhdj al-^dbidln.
Baqli, Ruzbihan . "'Abhar al-fashiqln," L e jasmin des fideles d'amour.
Edited by Henry Corbin . Tehran and Paris, 1958. In Persian .
"Sharh-i shathiydt,"  Les paradoxes  des soufis. Edited by Henry
Corbin. Tehra n and Paris, 1966. In Persian .
Barclay, Harol d B. "A Sudanes e Religiou s Brotherhood : At-tariq a al-
hindiya." Moslem  World 53, no. 2 (1963).
Barnett, Lione l D. Panjabi:  Printed Books in the British Museum.  Lon-
don, 1961 .
Barthold, Vasili j V. Herat zur Zeit Husain Baiqaras.  Translate d by Wal-
ter Hinz. Leipzig, 1938.
Bauer, Hans . Islamische  Ethik. 4 vols. Halle, 1916. Translate d from al-
Ghazzall's Ihyd.
Bausani, Alessandro . "About a Curious Mystica l Language. " East and
West 4, no. 4 (1958).
. "II Gulsan-i raz-i gadld di Muhamma d Iqbal." Annali del Isti-
tuto Universitario  Orientale  di Napoli, n.s. 8 (1959).
. "II pensiero religioso di Maulana Gialal ad-Din Rumi." Oriente
moderno 3 3 (April 1953).
. "Note su Mirza Bedil." Annali del Istituto Universitario  Ori-
entale di Napoli, n.s. 6 (1957).
. "Note su Shah Waliulla h di Delhi." Annali del Istituto Univer-
sitario Orientale  di Napoli, n.s. 10 (1961).
-. Persia religiosa.  Milan, 1959.
-. "Satana nell'oper a filosofico-poetic a di Muhamma d Iqbal." Ri-
vista degli  studi orientali  30 (1957).
-. Storia delle letterature  del Pakistan.  Milan, 1958.
Bausani, Alessandro , and Pagliaro , Antonio , Storia della letteratura
persiana. Milan , 1960.
Becka, Jiri . "Publication s to Celebrat e the 55oth Anniversar y of the
Birth of cAbdur Rahma n Jami." Archiv Orientdlni  34 (1966).
Bedil, Mirza . Kulliydt.  4 vols. Kabul, 1962-65. In Persian .
Bedil Rohrlwaro . Dlwdn. Edited by cAbdul Husay n Musawl . Karachi ,
1954. In Sindhi.

--- Page 465 ---
442 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Begg, Mirz a Wahiduddin . The Holy Biography  of Hazrat Khwaja Mu-
inaddin Chishti.  Ajmer, 1960.
Bel, Alfred . "Le sufisme en Occiden t musulman a u XII e et au XIII 6 siecle
de J. C." Annales  de I'institut  des etudes orientales  i (1934-35) .
Bercher, Leon , and Bousquet , G. H. Le livre des bon usages en matiere
de mariage.  Paris, 1953. Translatio n of a chapter of Ghazzali' s
Ihyd\
Berger, Morroe . Islam in Egypt Today: Social and Political  Aspects of
Popular Religion.  Cambridge , 1970.
Berthels, Y . E. "Grundlinie n der Entwicklungsgeschicht e des sufische n
Lehrgedichtes." Islamica  3, no. i (1929).
Bhatti, M . Salih. Mansur Halldj. Hyderabad , Sind, 1952. In Sindhi .
Birge, Joh n K. The Bektashi  Order of Dervishes.  1937. Reprint . Lon-
don, 1965 .
Biruni, al- . Kitdb al-Hind.  Edited by Eduard Sachau . London , 1887.
Translated b y Eduard Sachau as Al-Biruni's  India: An Account
of the Religion,  Philosophy,  Literature,  Geography,  Chronology,
Astronomy, Customs,  Laws and Astrology  of India, about AD
1030. London , 1881.
Blochet, Edgard . Catalogue  des Mss. persans de la bibliotheque  nation-
ale. Paris , igo5ff.
Bousquet, G . H. Ih'ya  couloum ad-din,  ou vivification  des sciences  de la
foi. Paris , 1955.
Bouyges, Maurice . Essai de chronologic  des oeuvres  d'al-Ghazdli.  Edited
by Miche l Allard. Beirut, 1959.
Brabazon, Francis . Stay with God: A Statement  in Illusion  on Reality.
Woombye, Queensland , 1959.
Braune, Walter . Die "Futuh  al-gaib" des cAbdul Qddir.  Berlin and Leip-
zig* 1933-
Bremond, Henri . Histoire  du sentiment  religieux  en France.  Vol. 9.
Paris, 1928 .
Brogelmann, Emil . Die religiosen  Erlebnisse  der persischen  Mystiker.
Hannover, 1932 .
Brown, Joh n P. The Dervishes.  1868. Reprint . London , 1968.
Browne, Edwar d G. A Literary  History of Persia. 4 vols. 1902-21 . Re-
print. Cambridge , 1957.
. "Notes on the Literatur e of the Hurufis and Their Connectio n
with the Bektash i Dervishes. " Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society,
1907.
Brugsch, Mohammed . Die kostbare  Perle im Wissen  des Jenseits.  Hann-
over, 1924 . A translatio n of Ghazzali' s eschatologica l treatise.
Brunei, Rene . Essai sur la confrerie  religieuse  des Aissouwa  au Maroc.
Paris, 1926 . $
. Le monachisme  errant dans I'Islam, Sldi Heddl et les Hedddwa.
Paris, 1955 .
Bukhari, al- . Kitdb garni ^as-sahih.  Edited by L. Krehl and W. Juynboll .
4 vols. Leiden, 1862-1908 .

--- Page 466 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 443
Bullhe Shah . Diwan. Edited by Faqir M. Faqir. Lahore, 1960. In Pan-
jabi.
Burckhardt, Titus . Introduction  aux doctrines  esoteriques  de I'Islam.
Algiers an d Lyon, 1955.
. Introduction  to Sufi Doctrines.  Lahore, 1959.
. La sagesse des prophetes.  Paris, 1955.
. Vom Sufitum. Munich , 1953.
Burhanpuri, Rashid . Burhdnpur  ke Sindhi auliyd. Karachi , 1957. In
Urdu.
Burton, Si r Richard . Sind and the Races That Inhabit the Valley of the
Indus. London , 1851.
Buslri, al- . La Bordah  du Cheikh al Bousiri. Edited and translate d by
Rene Basset . Paris, 1894.
. Die Burda. Edited by C. A. Ralfs. Vienna, 1860. In Arabic with
Persian an d Turkish translations .
Calverley, Edwi n Elliot. Worship  in Islam, Being a Translation,  with
Commentary and  Introduction  of al-Ghazzdll's  Book of the "Ihya 3"
on the Worship.  Madras, 1925.
Celebi, Asa f Halet. HE. Istanbul , 1951. Turkish poetry.
. Ldm-Alif.  Istanbul , 1953. Turkish poetry.
Centlivres, Pierre . Un bazar de I'Asie Centrale:  Tashqurgan.  Wiesbaden ,
1972.
Cerulli, Enrico . // "Libro della scala" e la questione  delle fonti arabo-
spagnole della  "Divina Commedia."  Vatican City, 1949.
Chelkowski, Peter , ed. BirunijRumi,  the Scholar  and the Saint. New
York, 1975 .
Chiragh-i Dehlawi . Khayr al-majdlis.  Edited by Khaliq Ahmad Nizami .
Aligarh, 1959 . In Persian .
Corbin, Henry . Avicenna  and the Visionary  Recital. New York and Lon-
don, 1960 .
. L'imagination  creatrice  dans le soufisme d'Ibn  cArabi. Paris ,
1958. Translate d by Ralph Manhei m as Creative  Imagination  in
the Sufism  of Ibn CArabi. Princeton , 1969.
. "Imaginatio n creatric e et priere creatrice dans le soufisme dTbn
Arabi." Eranos-Jahrbuch  25 (1956).
. "Quietud e et inquietud e de 1'ame dans le soufism e de Ruzbi-
han Baql l de Shiraz." Eranos-Jahrbuch  27 (1958).
. Sohrawardi  d'Alep, fondateur  de la doctrine illuminative  (ish-
rdql). Paris , 1939.
-. "Sympathi e et theopathi e chez les fideles d'amou r en Islam."
Eranos-Jahrbuch 2 4 (1955).
Crapazano, Vincent . "The Mamadsha. " In Scholars,  Saints, and Sufis:
Muslim Religious  Institutions  since 1500, edited by Nikki R. Ked-
die. Berkeley , 1972.
Banner, Victor , trans. Ibn ^Atd^illdh's  Sufi Aphorisms  (Kitdb al-hikam).
Leiden, 1973 .

--- Page 467 ---
444 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dara Shikoh . Saklnat al-auliyd?  Edited by M. Jalali NaDinI. Tehran ,
1344 sh./igGs . In Persian .
. Sirr-i akbar. Edited by Tara Chand and M. Jalali Na°ini. Teh-
ran, 1961 . In Persian .
Dard, Khwaj a Mir. Chahdr risdla. Bhopal, 1310 h./1892-93 . In Persian .
Contains Ndla-yi  Dard, Ah-i sard, Dard-i dil, and Sham c-i mahfil.
. Dlwdn-i  fdrsi. Delhi, 1310 h./1892-93 .
. c//m ul-kitdb.  Bhopal, 1309 h./1891-92 . In Persian .
. Urdu Diwdn. Edited by Khalll ur-Rahma n DaDudI. Lahore ,
1962. In Urdu.
Darqawi, ad- . Letters of a Sufi Master. Translate d by Titus Burckhardt .
London, 1961 .
Daudpota, Uma r Muhammad . Kaldm-i Girhdrl. Hyderabad , Sind, 1956.
In Sindhi .
Davis, F. Hadland . The Persian  Mystics: Jami. Ca. 1908. Reprint . La-
hore, n.d.
Daya RazI , Najmuddln . Mirsdd ul- cibdd. Tehran , 1312 5^/1933 . In Per-
sian.
DaylamI, C A1I ibn Ahmad ad-. Kitdb  catf al-alif aP-ma^luf  ild^l-ldm  al-
mactiif. Edite d by Jean-Claud e Vadet. Cairo, 1962. In Arabic.
. Slrat-i Ibn al-Haflf ash-Shlrdzi.  Translate d by Junayd- i Shlrazl.
Edited by Annemari e Schimmel . Ankara, 1955. In Persian .
Demeersemann, Andre . "Ce qu'Ibn Khaldou n pense d'al-Ghazzall. " In-
stitut des belles lettres arabes 21 (1958).
Depont, O. , and Coppolani , Xavier. Les confreries  religieuses  musul-
manes. Algiers , 1897.
Dermenghem, £mile . Le culte  des saints dans I'lslam Maghrebin.  Paris,
1954-
. Vies des saints musulmans.  Algiers, 1942.
, trans. L'eloge du vin (al-Khamrlya):  poeme mystique  de Omar
ibn al-Faridh,  et son commentaire  par Abdalghani  an-Nabolosi.
Paris, 1931 .
Digby, Simon . "Encounter s with Jogis in Indian Sufi Hagiography. "
Mimeographed. London : School of Orienta l and African Studies ,
January 1970 .
Dingemans, Herma n Henry. Al-Ghazdli's  boek der liefde. Leiden, 1938.
Dubler, Cesa r E. Vber islamischen  Grab- und Heiligenkult.  Zurich,
1960.
Eaton, Richar d M. "Sufis of Bijapur : Some Social Roles of Medieva l
Muslim Saints. " Paper read at the Conferenc e of South East Asian
Studies, 2 9 March 1972, New York.
Emre, Ismail . Dogu§lar  2. Adana, 1965. In Turkish .
. Yeni Yunus Emre ve Dogu?lan.  Istanbul, 1951. In Turkish .
Engelke, Irmgard . Sulejman  Tschelebis  Lobgedicht  auf die Geburt des
Propheten. Halle , 1926.
Ergun, Sadetti n Niizhet. Bekta$i Edebiyati  Antolojisi.  Istanbul , 1944. In
Turkish.

--- Page 468 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 445
Esin, Emel . "The Turkis h Baksi and the Painter Muhamma d Siyah
Kalam." Ad a Orientalia  32 (1970).
Ess, Josep h van. Die Gedankenwelt  des Hdrit_ al-Muhdsibi,  anhand von
Ubersetzungen aus  seinen Schriften dargestellt  und erldutert.  Bonn,
1961.
Elbe", Hermann . "Die Ruba cls des Abu Sacid ibn Abulchair. " Sitzungs-
berichte der  bayrischen  Akademie  der Wissenschaften,philologisch-
historische Klasse.  Munich, 1875, 1878.
. Konig und Derwisch.  Romantisch-mystisches  Epos vom Scheich
Hilali, de m persischen  Original treu nachgebildet.  Leipzig, 1870.
-. "Neupersisch e Literatur. " In Grundriss  der Iranischen  Philolo-
gie, compile d by Wilhelm Geiger and Ernst Kuhn. Strasbourg ,
1895-1901.
Ettinghausen, Richard . "The Emperor' s Choice." Festschrift.  E. Panof-
sky. New York, 1961.
. "Persian Ascensio n Miniature s of the i4th Century. " Academia
dei Lincei,  1957.
Fakhrl Harawi . Raudat as-saldtln.  Edited by Sayyid Hussamuddi n Rash-
di. Hyderabad , Sind, 1968. In Persian .
Fan! Muradabadi . Hindu shu^ard kd nactiya kaldm.  Lyallpur, 1962. In
Urdu.
Farhadi, Abdulghafu r Rawan. "Le majlis de al-Hallaj , de Shams-i Ta-
brezi et du Molla de Roum." Revue des etudes islamiques,  1954.
Faris, Nabi h A. The Book of Knowledge.  Lahore, 1962. Translatio n of
a chapter of Ghazzali' s Ihya 3.
. The Foundations  of the Articles  of Faith. Lahore, 1963. Trans-
lation of a chapter of Ghazzali' s Ihya*.
-. The Mysteries  of Almsgiving.  Beirut, 1966. Translatio n of a
chapter of Ghazzali' s Ihyd*.
Farrukh, Omar . At-tasawwuf  ffl-Isldm.  Beirut, 1957. In Arabic.
Faruqi, Bashi r Ahmad. The Mujaddid's  Conception  of God. Lahore,
*952-
. The Mujaddid's  Conception  of Tauhid.  Lahore, 1940.
Feldman, Herbert . From Crisis to Crisis: Pakistan 1962-1969.  London,
1972.
Field, Clau d H. Al-Ghazdll:  The Alchemy  of Happiness.  London, 1910.
. Mystics and Saints of Islam. London, 1910.
Firkawi, Mahmu d al-. Commentaire  du livre des etapes. Edited by Serge
de Laugie r de Beaureceuil . Cairo, 1953. In Arabic.
Fischel, Walte r J. "Jews and Judaism at the Court of the Moghul Em-
perors in Medieva l India." Islamic Culture, 1951.
Fischer, August . "Vergottlichun g und Tabuisierun g der Namen Mu-
hammads." I n Beitrdge  zur Arabistik,  Semitistik  und Islamkunde,
compiled b y Richar d Hartman n and Helmut h Scheel. Leipzig,
1944-
Fleischer, Johan n Leberecht . "tJber die farbige n Lichterscheinunge n

--- Page 469 ---
446 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
der Sufis. " Zeitschrift  derDeutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft
16 (1862) .
Fletcher, Joseph . The Old and New Teachings  in Chinese  Islam. Forth-
coming.
Fliigel, Gustav . Die arabischen,  persischen  und turkischen  Handschrif-
ten in der K. K. Hofbibliothek  zu Wien. Vienna, 1865-67 .
Frick, Heinrich . Ghazali's  Selbstbiographie,  ein Vergleich  mit Augustins
Konfessionen. Leipzig , 1919.
Friedmann, Yohanan . Shaykh  Ahmad Sirhindi:  An Outline  of His
Thought an d a Study of His Image in the Eyes of Posterity.  Mon-
treal, 1971 .
Fuck, Johann . "Die sufische Dichtun g in der Landessprach e des Pan-
jab." Orientalistische  Literaturzeitung  43 (1940).
Furuzanfar, Badi cuz-Zaman. Ahddlth-i  Mathnawl.  Tehran , 1334 sh./
1955. In Persian .
. Ma?dkhidh-i  qisa$ wa tamthlldt-l  Mathnawl.  Tehran, 1333 sh./
1954. In Persian .
. Risdla dar tahqlq-i  ahwdl wa zindagl-i  Mauldnd  Jaldloddln
Muhammad, mashhur  be-Maulawl.  Tehran , 1315 sh./i936 . In
Persian.
-. Sharh-i Mathnawl-yi  sharlf. Tehran , 1348 sh./ig69 . In Persian .
Fuzuli. Divan.  Edited by Abdulbak i Golpmarh . Istanbul , 1948. In
Turkish.
Gairdner, W . H. Temple . Al-Ghazzdli's  "Mishkdt  al-anwdr":  The Niche
for Lights.  London, 1915.
Garcin de Tassy, M. Joseph Heliodore . La poesie philosophique  et reli-
gieuse chez  les persans d'apres le "Mantiq  ut-tair."  Paris, 1857-60 .
Gardet, Louis . Experiences  mystiques  en terres nonchretiennes.  Paris,
1953-
. "La mentio n du nom divin, dhikr, dans la mystiqu e musul-
mane." Revue  Thomiste,  1952—53 .
Gawhary, Mohamma d al-. "Die Gottesname n im magische n Gebrauc h
in den al-Bun i zugeschriebene n Werken. " Ph.D. dissertation , Uni-
versity of Bonn, 1968.
Geertz, Clifford . Islam Observed:  Religious  Development  in Morocco
and Indonesia.  New Haven, 1968.
Ghani, M . Qasim. Ta^rlkh-i  tasawwuf  dar Islam. Tehran, 1330 sh./i95i .
In Persian .
Ghazzall, Ab u Hamid al-. Ihya3 culum ad-din.  4 vols. Bulaq, 1289 h./
1872-73. Commentar y by Sayyid Murtad a az-Zabldi . Ithdf as-sddat
al-muttaqln. 1 0 vols. Cairo, 1311 h./1893-94 .
. Al-Maqsad  al-asna 3 fi shark macdnl asmd*  Allah al-Husnd.  Ed-
ited by Fadlou Shehadi . Beirut, 1971.
-. Al-munqidh  rain ad-daldl.  Edited by A. Mahmud . Cairo, 1952.
Ghazzall, Ahmad . Sawdnih.  Aphorismen  uber die Liebe. Edited by Hell-
mut Ritter . Istanbul , 1942. In Persian .

--- Page 470 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 447
Gibb, Elia s John Wilkinson . A History of Ottoman  Poetry. 6 vols. igoo-
1909. Reprint . London , 1958-63 .
Gibb, Hamilto n A. R. Mohammedanism:  An Historical  Survey. London,
1949-
Gilsenan, Michael . Saint and Sufi in Modern  Egypt: An Essay in the
Sociology o f Religion.  Oxford, 1973.
- .  "Some Factors in the Declin e of the Sufi Orders in Mo
Egypt." Moslem World 57, no. i (1967).
Gisudaraz, Muhammad. Dlwdn  ants al-^ushshdq  . Lithographe d in India,
n.d. In Persian .
Gobel-Gross, Erhard . "Sirr-i akbar, Die Upanishad-Ubersetzun g Dara
Shikohs." Ph.D . dissertation , Universit y of Marburg , 1962.
Goldziher, Ignaz . "Arabisch e Synonymi k der Askese. " Der Islam 8
(1918).
- .  "Aus dem muhammedanische n Heiligenkul t in Aegypt
Globus 7 1 (1897).
- .  Al-Ghazzdll's  Streitschrift  gegen die Batiniyya.  Leiden, 19
- .  "Die Gotteslieb e in der islamische n Theologie. " Der Islam
. "Linguistische s aus der Literatu r der muhammedanische n
Mystik." Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft
26 (1872) .
. "Materialie n zur Entwicklungsgeschicht e des Sufismus. " Wie-
ner Zeitschrift  fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes  13 (1899).
. Die Richtungen  der islamischen  Koranauslegung.  Leiden, 1920.
. "Zauberelement e im islamische n Gebet. " In Orientalische
Studien Theodor  Noldeke  zum siebzigsten  Geburtstag  gewidmet.
Compiled b y Carl Bezold. 2 vols. Giessen , 1906.
Goldziher, Ignaz , and de Somogyi , Joseph. "The Spanis h Arabs and
Islam." Moslem  World 54, no. i (1964).
Golpmarli, Abdiilbaki . Islam ve Turk Illerinde  Futuvvet  te§kilati  ve
kaynaklari. Istanbul , 1952. In Turkish .
. Meldmilik  ve Meldmiler.  Istanbul , 1931. In Turkish .
. Mevldna  Celdleddin,  hayati, felsefesi, eserlerinden  secmeler.
Istanbul, 1951 . 3d ed. 1959. In Turkish .
. Mevldna'dan  sonra Mevlevilik.  Istanbul , 1953. In Turkish .
-. Yunus Emre, Hayati. Istanbul , 1936. In Turkish .
Gosche, Reinhard . Uber Ghazzalis  Leben und Werke.  Berlin, 1858.
Gramlich, Richard . Die schiitischen  Derwischorden  Persiens,  Teil I, Die
Affiliationen. Wiesbaden , 1965.
Grunebaum, Gustav e E. von. Der Islam im Mittelalter.  Zurich, 1963.
. Medieval  Islam. Chicago , 1953.
. "The Place of Parapsychologica l Phenomen a in Islam. " In
Malik Ra m Felicitation  Volume,  I. Delhi, 1972.
Habib, Madeleine . "Some Notes on the Naqshband i Order." Moslem
World 59 (1969).(1919)-

--- Page 471 ---
448 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Habibi, Abdu l Hayy. D Pashto adabiydto  tdrlkh. Kabul, 1342 sh./ig64 .
In Pashto .
. Pata Khazdna.  Kabul, 1339 sh./ig6i . In Pashto.
Hafiz, Shamsudd m Muhammad . Die Lieder des Hafiz, persisch  mit dem
Kommentar de s Sudi. Edited by Herman n Brockhaus . 1854-63 . Re-
print. 1965 . In Persian and Turkish .
Hallaj, Husay n ibn Mansu r al-. "Diwdn.  Essai de reconstitutio n by
Louis Massignon. " Journal asiatique,  January-Jul y 1931.
. Kitdb at-tawdsln,  texte arabe . . . avec la version persane d'al-
Baqll. Edite d and translate d by Louis Massignon . Paris, 1913.
Hallauer, Jakob . Die Vita des Ibrahim  ibn Edhem in der Tedhkiret  al-
Ewlija de s Ferid ed-Din Attar. Leipzig, 1925.
Hammer-Purgstall, Josep h von. Geschichte  der schonen  Redekiinste
Persiens. Vienna , 1818.
, comp. Das arabische  Hohe Lied der Liebe, das ist Ibnol Faridh's
Taije in Text und Obersetzung  zum ersten Male herausgegeben.
Vienna, 1854 .
-. Zwei Abhandlungen  zur Mystik und Magie des Islams. Edited
by Annemari e Schimmel . Vienna, 1974.
Haq, M. Anwarul . The Faith-Movement  of Mawldnd  Muhammad  Ilyds.
London, 1972 .
Haqq, Enamul . Muslim Bengali Literature.  Karachi, 1957.
. "Sufi Movemen t in Bengal. " Indo-Iranica  3, nos. 1-2 (1948).
Hartmann, Richard . "Futuww a and Malama. " Zeitschrift  der Deut-
schen Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft  72 (1918).
. "Die Himmelsreis e Muhammad s und ihre Bedeutun g in der
Religion de s Islam." In Vortrdge  der Bibliothek  Warburg.  Ham-
burg, 1928-29 .
. Al-Kuschairis  Darstellung  des Sufitums.  Berlin, 1914.
. "As-Sulami' s Risdlat al-Maldmatlya,."  Der Islam 8 (1918).
"Zur Frag e nach der Herkunf t und den Anfange n des Sufi-
tums." De r Islam 6/7(1915) .
Hashmi, Bashi r Ahmad. "Sarmad. " Islamic Culture,  1933-34.
Hasluck, Frederic k William . Christianity  and Islam under the Sultans.
2 vols. Oxford, 1929.
Hasrat, Bikram a Jit. Dara Shikuh: Life and Works. Calcutta , 1953.
Hastie, William . The Festival  of Spring from the "Divan"  of Jeldleddin.
Glasgow, 1903 .
Heer, Nicholas . "Some Biographica l and Bibliographica l Notes on al-
Haklm at-Tirmidhl. " In The World of Islam: Studies in Honour  of
Philip K. Hitti. Edited by James Kritzeck and R. Bayly Winder .
London, 1960 .
. "A Sufi Psychologica l Treatise. " Moslem  World 51 (1961).
Heiler, Friedrich . Erscheinungsformen  und Wesen der Religion.  Stutt-
gart, 1961 .
. Das Gebet. 5th ed. Munich , 1923. Translate d by Samuel Mc-
Comb as Prayer. New York, 1932.

--- Page 472 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 449
Hickman, William . "Eshrefoghl u Rumi: Reconstitutio n of His dlwdn."
Ph.D. dissertation , Harvard University , 1972.
Hilmi, Muhammad Mustafa. Al-haydt ar-ruhiyya ffl-Isldm. Cairo, 1954.
In Arabic .
. Ibn al-Fdrid wa^l-hubb  al-ildhl. Cairo, 1945. In Arabic.
A History  of Freedom  Movement.  Karachi, 1957.
Horovitz, Joseph . "Muhammad s Himmelfahrt. " Der Islam 9 (1919).
Horten, Max . Indische  Stromungen  in der islamischen  Mystik. Heidel-
berg, 1927-28 .
. Die religiosen  Vorstellungen  des Volkes im heutigen  Islam.
Halle, 1917 .
-. "Der Sinn der islamische n Mystik. " Scientia,  July 1927.
Hoshyarpuri, Hafeez . Mathnawiydt-i  Hir Ranjhd. Karachi , 1957. In
Persian.
Huart, Clemens , trans. Les saints des derviches  tourneurs,  by Shamsad -
din Ahma d Aflaki. Paris, 1918-22 .
Hujwiri, CAH ibn cUthman al-. Kashf al-mahjub. Edited by V. A. 2uk
skij. Leningrad , 1926. Reprint. Tehran , 1336 sh./ig57 .
. The "Kashf al-Mahjub,"  the Oldest Persian Treatise on Sufism
by al-Hujwiri.  Translate d by Reynol d A. Nicholson . Gibb Me-
morial Series , no. 17. 1911. Reprint. London , 1959.
Huri, Sofi . "Yunus Emre: In Memoriam. " Moslem  World 49, no. 2
(i959)-
Husain, Yusuf . Glimpses  of Medieval  Indian Culture.  2d ed. London ,
1959-
. L'Inde mystique  au moyen age. Paris, 1929.
Husaini, A . S. "Uways al-Qaran i and the Uwaysi Sufis." Moslem  World
57, no. 2 (1967).
Husaini, Saiyi d Abdul Qadir. The Pantheistic  Monism of Ibn al-Arabi.
Lahore, 1970 .
Husayn, C AH §afi. Al-adab as-sufi fi Misr ffl-qarn as-sdbi c al-hijri. Cairo,
1964. In Arabic.
clbadi, Qutbaddl n al-. At-tasfiya  fi ahwdl as-sufiya, or Suflndme.  Edited
by Ghula m Muhamma d Yusuf I. Tehran, 1347 sh./ig68 . In Persian .
Ibn cAbbad ar-Rondi . "Ar-rasd'il  as-sugrd":  Lettres de direction  spiritu-
. elle. Edited by Paul Nwyia. Beirut, 1957.
Ibn cArabi, Muhyiuddin . Dhakhd^ir  al-a'ldq. Cairo, 1968. Commentar y
on the Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq.  In Arabic.
. Fusus al-hikam.  Edited by Abu Dl-AlaD Affifi . Cairo, 1946. In
Arabic.
. Al-futuhdt  al-makkiyya.  4 vols. Cairo, 1329 h./ign. In Arabic.
. Al-kitdb  at-tidhkdn.  Cairo, ig6g. Memoria l in honor of Ibn
cArabi.
. Sufis of Andalusia:  The Ruh al-quds and Al-Durrat  al-fdkhirah.
Translated b y R. W. J. Austin. London, ig7i.
. The "Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq":  A Collection  of Mystical Odes by

--- Page 473 ---
450 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Muhylifddln ibn  al-cArabi. Edite d and translate d by Reynol d A.
Nicholson. London , 1911.
Ibn cAtaD Alla h al-Iskandari , Ahmad. Kitdb al-hikam.  Translate d by
R. Arche r in "Muhammada n Mysticis m in Sumatra. " Malaya n
Branch, Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society 15, no. 2 (1937)-
. Miftdh al-faldh wa misbdh al-arwdh.  Cairo, 1961. In Arabic .
. Mundjdt.  Istanbu l Universites i Kiitiiphanesi , Arab. 1574. In
Arabic.
Ibn al-Jauzi . Talbis Iblis. Cairo, 1340 h./1921-22 . In Arabic. Trans-
lated by David Samuel Margoliout h as "The Devil's Delusion. " Is-
lamic Culture 12 (1938).
Ibn Kathir . Maulid rasul Allah. Edited by §alahuddi n al-Munajjid .
Beirut, 1961 .
Ibn Khaldun . Shifd* as-sd^il li-tahdhlb  al-masd^il.  Edited by M. ibn Tavit
at-Tanci. Istanbul , 1957. In Arabic.
Ibn Qayyi m al-Jauziyya . Kitdb asrdr as-saldt.  Istanbul Universites i
Kiitiiphanesi, Arab . 2347. In Arabic.
Ibn Sma, Abu CA1I. "Risdla  ffl-^ishq":  Traitee  sur I'amour.  Edited by
August Ferdinan d Mehren . Leiden, 1894. In Arabic.
Ibn Taghribirdi , Abu 3l-Mahasin. An-nujum  az-zdhira  fi muluk Misr
wa^l-Qdhira. Edite d by William Popper . 8 vols. Berkeley , 1908-36 .
Ibn Taymiyya. "Ar-radd cala Ibn cArabi waV$ufiyya." In Majmuca
rasd/'il shaykh  al-Isldm Ibn Taymiyya.  Cairo, 1348 h./1929-30 .
Ihsan, Abu°l-Fayd . "Raudat al-qayyumiya. " Ms. in Library of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal.
Ikbal AH Shah, Sirdar. Islamic Sufism. London, 1933.
Ikram, Sheik h Muhammed . Muslim Rule in India and Pakistan.  La-
hore, 1966 .
. Rud-i kauthar.  4th ed. Lahore, 1969. In Urdu.
Iqbal, Afzal . The Life and Thought  of Rumi. Lahore, ca. 1956.
Iqbal, Muhammad . The Development  of Metaphysics  in Iran. Cam-
bridge, 1908 .
. Jdwidndme.  Lahore, 1932. In Persian . Translate d into English
by Shaikh Mahmu d Ahmad , Lahore, 1961, and by A. J. Arberry ,
London, 1966 ; into Italian by Alessandr o Bausani , 1955; into
French by Eva Meyerovitch , 1962; into German verse by Annemari e
Schimmel, 1957 ; and into Turkish prose by Annemari e Schimmel ,
1958-
. Six Lectures  on the Reconstruction  of Religious  Thought  in
Islam. Lahore , 1930.
-. Zabur-i ^ajam. Lahore, 1927. Part translate d by A. J. Arberry as
Persian Psalms.  Lahore, 1948.
:Iraqi, Fakhruddm . Dlwdn. Edited by Sacid Nafisi . Tehran , 1338 sh./
1959. In Persian .
. The Song of the Lovers (cushshdqndme). Edite d and translate d
by A. J. Arberry . Oxford, 1939.

--- Page 474 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 451
Isfahan!, Ab u Nucaym al-. Hilyat al-auliyff'.  10 vols. Cairo, 1932. In
Arabic.
Ivanow, Vladimir . "A Biograph y of Shaykh Ahmad- i Jam." Journal  of
the Royal Asiatic Society, 1917.
. "Tabaqa t of Ansari in the Old Languag e of Herat." Journal o f
the Royal Asiatic Society, January-Jul y 1923.
Izutsu, Toshihiko . "The Basic Structur e of Metaphysica l Thinkin g in
Islam." In Collected  Papers on Islamic Philosophy  and Mysticism,
edited by Mehdi Mohagheg h and Herman n Landolt . Tehran, 1971.
. A Comparative  Study of the Key Philosophical  Concepts  of
Sufism an d Taoism.  2 vols. Tokyo, 1966-67 .
. "The Parado x of Light and Darknes s in the Garden of Mystery
of Shabastari. " In Anagogic  Qualities  of Literature,  edited by
Joseph P. Strelka. Universit y Park, Pa., 1971.
Jabre, Farid . "L'Extas e de Plotin et le Fano? de Ghazall. " Studia Is-
lamica 6 (1956).
. Al-Ghazdll:  Al-Munqidh  min ad-daldl (erreur et delivrance).
Beirut, 1959 .
. La notion de certitude  selon Ghazall. Paris, 1958.
-. La notion de rnacrifa chez Ghazall. Beirut, 195
Jacob, Georg . Beitrage  zur Kenntnis  des Derwisch-Ordens  der Bekta-
schis. Berlin , 1908.
- .  Geschichte  des Schattenspiels.  Hannover , 1925.
Jacfrl, Ral s Ahmad. Iqbdl aur cashq-i rasul.  Lahore, 1956. In Urdu.
Jagtiani, Lalchan d A. Muhammad  rasul Allah. Hyderabad , Sind, 1911.
In Sindhi .
Jami, Maulan a cAbdurrahman. Dlwdn-i  kdmil. Edited by Hashim Riza.
Tehran, 134 1 sh./i962 . In Persian .
^ih. Tehran , 1342 sh./ig63 . In Persian . Edited and trans-
lated into English by Edward Henry Whinftel d and Mirza Muham -
mad Ka/wini . London, 1906.
Nafahdt al-uns.  Edited by Mahdi Tauhidipur . Tehran , 1336
sh./iQ57. I n Persian .
-. "Tuhfat al-ahrdr":  The Gift of the Noble. Edited by E. Forbes-
Falconer. London , 1848. In Persian .
Jazuli, Ab u cAbdallah. Dald^il  al-khayrdt.  In Arabic. Numerou s editions .
Jeffery, Arthur . "Ibn al-cArabi's Shajarat  al-Kawn."  Islamic Studies
10-11 (1959) .
Jill, cAbdul Kari m al-. Al-Insdn  al-kdmil.  Cairo, 1340 h./ig2i-22 . In
Arabic.
Jotwani, Motilal. Shdh cAbdul Karlm. New Delhi, 197
. "Shah Latif: Man and Poet." Indian Literatures  6, no. 2 (1963).
Junayd-i Shirazi. Shadd al-izdr fl khatt al-auzdr can zuwwdr al-mazdr.
Edited by Muhamme d Qazvini and cAbbas Iqbal . Tehran, 1328 sh./
1949-Jurji, Edwar d Jabra, ed. and trans. Illumination  in Islamic Mysticism.
Princeton, 1938 .. Lawc

--- Page 475 ---
452 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. "The Illuministi c Sufis." Journal  of the American  Oriental
Society, 1937 .
Kalabadhi, Abu Bakr Muhammad al-. At-tacarruf li-madhhab ahl at-
tasawwuf. Edited by A. J. Arberry. Cairo, 1934. In Arabic.
Kalim, Ab u Talib. Dlwdn. Edited by Partaw Baida°i . Tehran, 1336 sh./
1957. In Persian .
Karaosmanoglu, Yaku p Kadri. Erenlerin  bagtndan.  Istanbul , 1922. In
Turkish. Translate d by Annemari e Schimme l as Aus dem Garten
der Weisen.  In Das Geisterhaus,  edited by Otto Spies. Kevelaer ,
1949-
. Nur Baba. Istanbul , 1922. In Turkish . Translate d by Anne-
marie Schimme l as Flamme  und Falter. Gummersbach , 1948.
Kaygusuz Abdal,  Hatayi, Kul Himmet.  Istanbul, 1953. In Turkish .
Kazi, Elsa , trans. "Risalo"  of Shah Abdul Latif. Hyderabad , Sind, 1965.
Keddie, Nikk i R., ed. Scholars,  Saints, and Sufis: Muslim Religious  In-
stitutions since  1500. Berkeley , 1972.
Keklik, Nihat . Sadreddin  Konev?nin  Felsefesinde  Allah, Kainat, ve In-
san. Istanbul , 1967.
Khaja Khan . Studies in Tasawwuf.  Madras, 1923.
Khalifa. Se e cAbdul Hakim , Khalifa.
Khanqahi, A . Tahir al-. Guzlda dar akhldq u tasawwuf.  Edited by Iraj
Afshar. Tehran , 1347 sh./igGS . In Persian .
Khaqani. Dlwdn.  Edited by Ziauddi n Sajjadi. Tehran, 1338 sh./ig5g . In
Persian.
Kharraz, Ab u Bakr al-. Kitdb as-sidq: The Book of Truthfulness.  Edited
by A. J. Arberry. Oxford, 1937. In Arabic.
Khawam, Rene" . Propos d'amour des mystiques  musulmanes.  Paris, 1960.
Khushhal Kha n Khattak . Muntakhabdt.  Peshawar , 1958. In Pashto.
Kindermann, Heinz , trans. Vber die guten Sitten beim Essen und Trin-
ken. Leiden , 1964. Translatio n of a chapter of Ghazzali' s Ihya 3.
Kissling, Han s Joachim . "Aq Sems ed-Din: Ein tiirkische r Heiliger aus
der Endzeit von Byzans." Byzantinische Zeitschrift 44 (1951).
. "Aus der Geschicht e des Chalvetiyye-Ordens. " Zeitschrift  der
Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft 102 (1953).
. "Einiges iiber den Zeijnije-Orde n im osmanische n Reiche. " Der
Islam 39 (1964).
. "Die islamische n Derwischorden. " Zeitschrift  fur Religions-
und Geistesgeschichte  12 (1960).
. "Das Menaqybnam e Scheich Bedr ad-Dins. " Zeitschrift  der
Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft 101 (1950).
. "The Role of the Dervish Orders in the Ottoma n Empire. " In
Studies in Islamic  Cultural  History,  edited by Gustav e E. von
Grunebaum. Chicago , 1954.
. "§acban Veli und die §acbaniyye." I n Serta Monacensia  Franz
Babinger zum  15. Januar 1951 als Festgruss  dargebracht.  Compile d
by Hans Joachim Kisslin g and A. Schmaus .
. "The Sociologica l and Educationa l Role of the Dervish Orders

--- Page 476 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 453
in the Ottoma n Empire. " Memoirs  of the American  Anthropologi-
cal Association  76 (1954).
. "Die Wunde r der Derwische. " Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Mor-
genlandischen Gesellschaft  107 (1956).
. "Zum islamische n Heiligenwese n auf dem Balkan. " Zeitschrift
fur Balkanologie,  1963.
. "Zur Frage der Anfang e des Bektaschitum s in Albanien. " Ori-
ens 15 (1962).
-. "Zur Geschicht e des Derwischorden s der Bajramiyya. " Siidost-
forschungen 1 5 (1956).
Klappstein, Paul . Vier turkestanische  Heilige,  ein Beitrag  zum Ver~
stdndnis de r islamischen  Mystik. Berlin, 1919.
Kocatiirk, Vasf i Mahir. Tekke §iiri Antolojisi.  Ankara, 1955. In Turkish .
Kofler, Hans , trans. Das Buch der Siegelringsteine  der Weisheit.  Graz,
1970. Translatio n of Ibn cArabi's Fusus  al-hikam.
Kopriilii, Mehme t Fuat. Eski §airlerimiz.  Istanbul , 1931. In Turkish .
. Turk edebiyattnda  ilk mutesavviflar.  2d ed. Ankara, 1966. In
Turkish.
Kriss, Rudolf , and Kriss-Heinrich , Hubert. Volksglaube  im Bereich des
I slams. 2 vols. Wiesbaden , 1960-61 .
Kubra, Najmuddin . Die fawa/'ih al-gamdl  wa fawdtih al-galdl des Nagm-
uddtn Kubra.  Edited by Fritz Meier. Wiesbaden , 1957. In Arabic .
. Risdla fi fadllat as-saldt.  Istanbul Universites i Kiitiiphanesi ,
Arab. 4530 . In Arabic.
Kiihnel, Ernst . Islamische  Schriftkunst.  1942. Reprint. Graz, 1972.
Lahiji, Muhammad . Mafdtlh al-fjdz fl sharh gulshan-i  rdz. Edited by
Kaiwan Saml ci. Tehran , 1337 sh./ig58 . In Persian .
Landolt, Hermann . "Simnan i on Wahda t al-Wujud. " In Collected  Pa-
pers on Islamic  Philosophy  and Mysticism,  edited by Mehdi Mo-
haghegh an d Herman n Landolt . Tehran , 1971.
, ed. and trans. Correspondence  spirituelle,  echange entre Nurod-
din Esfarayeni (ob. jiJ11317) et son disciple cAldoddawleh Semndnl
(ob. 73611336).  Tehran
 and Paris, 1972.
Lane, Edwar d William . The Manners  and Customs  of the Modern
Egyptians. London , 1860.
Laugier d e Beaureceuil , Serge de. Khwadja  Abdullah  Ansari, mystique
hanbalite. Beirut , 1965
Le Chatelier , A. Confreries  musulmanes  du Hejaz. Paris, 1887.
Leeuwen, Aren d Theodo r van. "Essai de bibliographi c d'al Ghazzali. "
Institut de s belles lettres arabes 21 (1958).
. Ghazdll as apologeet  van den Islam. Leiden, 1947.
Lentz, Wolfgang . "cAttar als Allegoriker. " Der Islam 35 (1960).
Lewis, I. M. "Sufism in Somaliland. " Bulletin  of the School of Oriental
and African  Studies 17 (1955), 18 (1956).
Lings, Martin . A Sufi, Saint of the Twentieth  Century.  2d ed. London ,
I97l-

--- Page 477 ---
454 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Littmann, Enno . Ahmed il-Bedawi,  Ein Lied auf den dgyptischen  Na-
tionalheiligen. Mainz , 1950.
. Islamisch-arabische  Heiligenlieder.  Wiesbaden , 1951.
. Mohammad  im Volksepos.  Copenhagen , 1950.
Loosen, Paul . "Die weisen Narren des Naisaburi. " Zeitschrift  fur As-
syriologie 2 7 (1912).
Macdonald, Dunca n Black. "Emotiona l Religion in Islam as Affected by
Music an d Singing , Being a Translatio n of a Book of the Ihya*
cUlum ad-Din  of al-Ghazzali. " Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,
1901.
. "The Life of al-Ghazzali. " Journal  of the American,  Oriental
Society 20 (1899).
McKane, William . Al-Ghazdli's  Book of Fear and Hope. Leiden, 1962.
Mackeen, A . Mohamed . "The Sufi-Qaw m Movement. " Moslem  World
53, no. 3 (1963).
McPherson, Josep h Williams . The Moulid  of Egypt. Cairo, 1941.
Mahmud, c Abdul Halim . Al-madrasa  ash-shddhiliyya  al-hadltha  wa
imdmuhd Abffl-Hasan  ash-Shddhill.  Cairo, ca. 1968. In Arabic.
Mahmud, cAbdul Qadir. Al-falsafatu^s-sufiyya ffl-Islam. Cairo, 1967.
Arabic.
Makhzan Shah CAbdul Latif Bhitffi. Hyderabad, Sind, 1954. In Sindhi.
MakkT, Ab u Talib al-. Qut al-qulub  fl mu^dmaldt  al-mahbub.  2 vols.
Cairo, 13 ioh./1892-93 . In Arabic.
Malik, Hafeez , ed. Muhammad  Iqbal: Poet-Philosopher  of Pakistan,
New York , 1971.
Manufi, M . A. F. al-. At-tasazvwuf  al-Isldml  al-khdlis.  Cairo, 1969. In
Arabic.
Mardin, Ome r Fevzi. Varidat-i  Suleyman  §erhi. Istanbul , 1951. In
Turkish.
Marshall, D . N. Mughals  in India: A Bibliography.  Bombay , 1967.
Martin, B . G. "A Short History of the Khalwat i Order of Dervishes. " In
Scholars, Saints,  and Sufis: Muslim Religious  Institutions  since
1500, edite d by Nikki R. Keddie. Berkeley , 1972.
Mason, Herbert . Two Medieval  Muslim Statesmen.  The Hague, 1971.
Massignon, Louis . "L'alternativ e de la pensee mystiqu e en Islam:
monisme existentie l ou monism e testimonial. " Annulaire  du Col-
lege de France 52 (1952).
. La cite des morts au Caire. Cairo, 1958.
. "Le 'coeur' (al-qalb}  dans la priere et la meditatio n musul-
mane." Etudes  carmelitaines  9 (1950).
. Essai sur les origines du lexique technique  de la mystique  mu-
sulmane. Paris , 1928.
. "L'homm e parfait en Islam et son originalit e eschatologique. "
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 5 (1947).
. "Interference s philosophique s et percees metaphysique s dans
la mystiqu e Hallajienne : notion de 1'Essentie l desir." Melanges
Marechal 2  (1950).

--- Page 478 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 455
. "La legende de Hallac e Mansu r en pays turcs." Revue des
etudes islamiques,  1941-46.
. "L'oeuvr e Hallagienn e d'Attar. " Revue des etudes islamiques,
1941-46.
. La passion d'al-Hosayn  ibn Mansour  Al-Hallaj,  martyr mys-
tique de I'lslam execute a Bagdad le 26 Mars 922. 2 vols. Paris, 192
. "Qissat Husayn al-Hallaj. " In Donum  Natalicum  H. S. Nyberg.
Stockholm, 1954 .
. Quatre textes inedits relates a la biographie  d'al-Hallaj.  Paris,
19141. Receuil  des textes inedits concernant  I'histoire  de la mystique
en pays d'Islam. Paris, 1929.
. "Salma n Pak et les premice s spirituelle s de I'lslam iranien. "
Societe de s etudes iraniennes  7 (1934).
. "La survie d'al-Hallaj. " Bulletin  d'etudes  arabes Damas 11
(1945-46).
-. "La vie et les oeuvres de Ruzbeha n Baqli." In Studia Orientalia
loanni Pedersen  dicata septuagenario.  Copenhagen , 1953.
Massignon, Louis , and Huart, Clemens . "Les entretien s de Lahore. "
Journal asiatique  209 (1926).
Massignon, Louis , and Kassim , A. M. "Un essai de bloc islamo-hindo u
au XVII siecle: I'humanism e mystiqu e du Prince Dara." Revue du
monde musulman  63 (1926).
Massignon, Louis , and Kraus, Paul. Akhbdr al-Hallaj,  texte ancien rela-
tif a la predication  et au supplice du mystique  musulman  al-Hosayn
b. Mansour  al-Halldj.  1936. 3d ed. Paris, 1957.
Mayne, Peter . Saints of Sind. London, 1956.
Mehr, Ghula m Rasul. Sayyid Ahmad Shahld. Lahore, ca. 1955. In Urdu.
Meier, Fritz . "Der Derwischtanz. " Asiatische  Studien 8 (1954).
. "Der Geistmensc h bei dem persische n Dichter cAttar." Eranos-
Jahrbuch 1 3 (1946).
. "Hurasan un d das Ende der klassische n Sufik." In La Persia nel
medioevo. Rome , 1971.
. "Ein Knigge fur Sufis." In Scritti in onore di Giuseppe  Furlani.
Rome, 1957 .
. "Das Problem der Natur im esoterische n Monismu s des Islams."
Eranos-Jahrbuch 1 4 (1946).
. "Qusayri s Tartlb as-suluk. " Oriens 16 (1963).
. "Die Schrifte n des cAziz-i Nasafi. " Wiener  Zeitschrift  fiir die
Kunde de s Morgenlandes  52 (1953).
. "Soufism e et declin culturel. " In Classicisme  et declin culturel
dans I'histoire  de I'lslam,  edited by Gustav e E. von Grunebaum .
Paris, 1957 .
. "Stambule r Handschrifte n dreier persische n Mystiker : cAin al-
Qudat al-Hamadani , Nagm ad-din al-Kubra , Nagm ad-din ad-
Daja." De r Islam 24 (1937).
. Vom Wesen der islamischen  Mystik. Basel, 1943.

--- Page 479 ---
456 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. "Die Welt der Urbilder bei CA1I Hamadani. " Eranos-Jahrbuch
18 (1950).
. "Ein wichtige r Handschriftenfun d zur Sufik." Oriens 20 (1967).
—. "Zur Biographi c Ahmad- i Gam's und zur Quellenkund e von
Gaml's Nafahatifl-uns." Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndi-
schen Gesellschaft  97 (1943).
, ed. Die "fawcPih  al-gamdl  wa fawdtih al-galdl"  des Nagmuddin
al-Kubrd. Wiesbaden , 1957.
ed. "Firdaus  al-mursidiya  fi asrdr as-samadiya":  Die Vita, des
Scheich Ab u Ishdq al-Kdzarunl.  Leipzig, 1948.
Merx, Adalbert . Ideen und Grundlinien  einer allgemeinen  Geschichte
der Mystik.  Heidelberg , 1893.
Meyerovitch, Eva . Mystique  et poesie en Islam, Djalal-ud  Din Rumi et
Pordre de s dervishes  tourneurs.  Paris, 1972.
Mez, Adam . Die Renaissance  des Islam. Heidelberg , 1922. Translate d
by S. Khuda Bakhsh and David Samuel Margoliouth . Patna, 1937.
Michon, Jean-Louis . Le Soufi Marocain  Ahmad ibn ^Ajlba et son mfrdj.
Paris, 1973 .
Miller, W . McE. "Shicah Mysticism : The Sufis of Gunabad. " Moslem
World 13 (1923).
Mir Valiuddin . Love of God. Hyderabad , Deccan, 1968.
Miyen Shah clndt jo kaldm. Edited by Dr. Nabi Bakhsh Baloch. Hydera-
bad, Sind , 1963. In Sindhi.
Moayyad, Heshmat . Die Maqdmdt  des Gaznawl,  eine legenddre  Vita
Ahmad-i Gams,  genannt Zandapll,  1049-1141.  Frankfurt , 1958.
Mohaghegh, Mehdi , and Landolt , Hermann , eds. Collected  Papers on
Islamic Philosophy  and Mysticism.  Tehran, 1971.
Mohan Sing h (Diwana) . An Introduction  to Panjabi  Literature.  Amrit-
sar, 1951.
. Sikh Mysticism.  Amritsar , India, 1964. Translate d into German
as Mystik und Yoga der Sikh-Meister.  Zurich, 1967.
Mole\ Marijan . "Amour du Dare" Mansour : 1'apprentissag e mystiqu e de
Baha3 ad-Di n Naqshband. " Revue des etudes islamiques  27 (1959)-
"La Dans e exstatiqu e en Islam." Sources orientales  6 (1963).
"Les Kubrawiyy a entre sunnism e et shiisme. " Revue des etudes
islamiques, 1961 .
. Les mystiques  musulmans.  Paris, 1965.
. "Profession s de foi de deux Kubrawis. " Bulletin  de I'Institut
Francais d e Damas 17 (1961-63) .
. "Un traite de cAlaDad-dawla Simnan i sur CA1I ibn Abi Talib."
Bulletin d e I'Institut  Francais  de Damas 16 (1958-60) .
-, ed. ^Aziz an-Nasafi,  Le livre de I'homme  parfait. Paris and Teh-
ran, 1962 .
Moreno, Martin o Mario. Antologia  della Mistica Arabo-Persiana.  Bari,
1951-
Muhasibi, al-Harit h al-. Kitdb ar-ricdya li-huquq  Allah. Edited by Mar->

--- Page 480 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 457
garet Smith . Gibb Memoria l Series, n.s. 15. London , 1940. In
Arabic.
. "Kitab as-sabr waVrida. " Edited by Otto Spies. Islamica  6
(!932).
- . Kitab at-tawahhum.  Edited by A. J. Arberry . Cairo, 1937
Arabic.
Kitab bad^  man andba ild^lldhi ta^dla, Die Schrift des Hdrit^ al-
Muhdsibi uber  den Anfang der Umkehr  zu Gott. Edited and trans-
lated by Hellmu t Ritter. Gliickstadt , 1935.
Mujeeb, Mohammed . The Indian Muslims.  Montrea l and London ,
1969-
Munawi, cAbdur RaDuf al-. Al-kawdkib ad-durriyya. Cairo, 1938. In
Arabic.
Nabahani, Yusiif b. Ismacil an-. Jdmic kardmdt al-auliyd?. Bulaq, E
1329 h./ign . In Arabic.
Nadim, an- . The Fihrist of al-Nadim.  Edited and translate d by Bayard
Dodge. 2 vols. New York, 1970.
Nadwl, Maulan a cAbdas Salam . Shfr al-Hind.  Azamgarh , ca. 1936. In
Urdu.
Nagel, Tilman . Friihe Ismailiya  und Fatimiden  im Lichte  der risdlat
iftitdh ad-da cwd. Bonn , 1972.
Nasr, Seyye d H. Ideals and Realities  of Islam. London, 1966.
. Sufi Essais. London, 1972.
. Three Muslim Sages. Cambridge , Mass., 1963.
Nicholson, Reynold A. "An Early Arabic Version of the Mfrdj of Abu
Yazid al-Bistaml. " Islamica  2 (1925).
. "The Goal of Muhammada n Mysticism. " Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society,  1913.
. "A Historica l Enquiry concernin g the Origin and Developmen t
of Sufism. " Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1906.
. The Idea of Personality  in Sufism. Cambridge , 1923.
. "The Lives of cUmar Ibnu Dl-Farid an d MuhiyyuMd m Ibnu Dl-
cArabi." Journal  of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1906.
. The Mystics  of Islam. 1914. Reprint. Chester Springs, Pa., 1962.
. A Persian Forerunner  of Dante. Towyn-on-Sea , 1944.
. Rumi: Poet and Mystic. London, 1950.
. Studies in Islamic Mysticism.  1921. Reprint. Cambridge , 1967.
. Tales of Mystic Meaning.  London, 1931.
ed. and trans. Selected  Poems from the "Divan-i  Shams-i Ta-
briz." 1898 . Reprint. Cambridge , 1961.
Nieuwenhuijze, C . A. O. van. Samsu'l Din van Pasai, Bijdrage tot de
kennis de r Sumatraansche  mystiek. Leiden, 1945.
Niffari, Muhamma d ibn cAbdiDl-Jabbar an- . The Mawdqif  and Mukhd-
tabdt of Muhammad  ibn ^Abdfl-Jabbdr  al-Niffari,  with other frag-
ments. Edite d and translate d by A. J. Arberry . Gibb Memoria l
Series, n.s . 9. London, 1935. In Arabic.
Niyazi Misri . Dwdn. Istanbul , 1955. In Turkish .

--- Page 481 ---
458 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Nizami, Khali q Ahmad . The Life and Times of Shaikh Farld Ganj-i
Shakar. Aligarh , 1955.
"Malfuzat k l tarlkhi ahammiyat. " In Arshi Presentation  Vol-
ume. Edite d by Malik Ram. Delhi, 1961. In Urdu.
"Naqshbandi Influenc e on Mugha l Rulers and Politics. " Is-
lamic Culture  39 (1965).
Shah Wallulldh  ke siydsl maktubdt.  Aligarh, 1950. In Urdu.
"Some Aspect s of Khanqa h Life in Medieva l India." Studia
Islamica 8  (1957).
, Some Aspects of Religion  and Politics in India during the ijth
Century. Bombay , 1961.
Ta^rlkh-e mashd^ikh-i  Chisht. Delhi, 1953. In Urdu.
Nwyia, Paul , S. J. Exegese  coranique  et langage  mystique.  Beirut, 1970.
Ibn cAbbdd de Honda. Beirut, 196
Ibn ^Ata 3 Allah et la naissance  de la confrerie  sddilite.  Beirut,
1972.
. Trois oeuvres inedites de mystiques  musulmans:  Saqiq al-Balhi,
Ibn ^Atd, Niffari. Beirut, 1973.
, ed. Ar-rasd^il  as-sugrd:  Lettres de direction  spirituelle,  by Ibn
cAbbad ar-Rundi . Beirut, 1957. In Arabic.
Nyberg, Hendri k Samuel . Kleiner e Schriften  des Ibn cArabi. Leiden ,
Obermann, Julius . Der religiose  und philosophische  Subjektivismus
Gazzdlls. Leipzig , 1921.
Onder, Mehmet . Mevldna.  Ankara, 1971. In Turkish .
Mevldna bibliografyasi:  i. Basmalar  (Kitap-makale).  2. Yazma-
lat. Ankara , 1973-74. In Turkish .
, Mevldna  §ehri Konya. Kenya, 1962. In Turkish .
Mevldna §iirleri  Antolojisi.  ad ed. Konya, 1958. In Turkish .
Padwick, Constanc e E. Muslim Devotions.  London, 1960.
Palacios, M . Asm. Algazel, Dogmatica,  Moral y Ascetica.  Zaragoza , 1901.
La Espiritualidad  de Algazel  y su sentido  Cristiano.  4 vols.
Madrid an d Granada , 1934-41 .
El Islam cristianizado.  Estudio de "Sufismo"  a trave de les obras
de Abenarabi  de Murcia.  Madrid, 1931.
"Sadilies y  alumbrados. " Al-Andalus  9 (1944), 16 (1951).
Palmer, E . H. Oriental  Mysticism:  A Treatise  on the Sufiistic  and Uni-
tarian Theosophy  of the Persians.  1867. Reprint. London, 1969.
Parsram, Jethmal . Sufis of Sind. Madras, 1924.
Pedersen, Johannes . Muhammedansk  mystik. Copenhagen , 1923.
Pir Sultan  Abdal. Varhk Klasikleri , no. 13. Istanbul , 1953.
Profitlich, Manfred . Die Terminologie  Ibn ^Arabis  im "Kitdb wasd^il
as-sd^il" de s Ibn Saudakln.  Freiburg , 1973.
Qanic, Mi r CA1I Shir. Makllndme.  Edited by Sayyid Hussamuddi n
Rashdi. Hyderabad , 1967. In Persian and Sindhi.
Maqdldt ash-shu fard'. Edite d by Sayyid Hussamuddi n Rashdi .
Karachi, 1956 . In Persian .i9!9-

--- Page 482 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 459
. Tuhfat al-kirdm.  Hyderabad , Sind, 1957. Sindhi translatio n of
the Persia n original .
Qanungo, Kalika-Ranjan . Dara Shukoh. Calcutta , 1935.
Qasim, cAbduDl-Hakim. Ayydm  al-insdn as-sab ca. Cairo, 1971. In Arabic.
Qasimi, Ghula m Mustafa . "Hashimiy a Library. " In Mihrdn  jd Motl.
Karachi, 1959 . In Sindhi.
Quddusi, I cjazul Haqq . cAbdul Quddus  Gangohl.  Karachi , 1961. In
Urdu.
. Tadhkira-yi  sufiya-yi Bengal. Lahore, 1965. In Urdu.
. Tadhkira-yi  sufiya-yi Panjdb.  Karachi , 1962. In Urdu.
. Tadhkira-yi  fufiya-yi Sarhad.  Lahore, 1966. In Urdu.
. Tadhkira-yi  sufiya-yi Sind. Karachi , 1959. In Urdu.
Qureshi, Ishtia q Husain. Th e Muslim  Community  of the Indo-Pakistan
Subcontinent. Th e Hague, 1962.
Qushayri, Abu^l-Qasi m al-. Ar-rasd^il  al-qushayriyya.  Edited and trans-
lated by F. M. Hasan. Karachi , 1964. In Urdu.
. Ar-risdla  fl cilm at-tasawwuf.  Cairo, 1330 h./i9i2 . In Arabic.
. Kitdb al-mfrdj. Edited by A. H. Abdel Kader. Cairo, 1964. In
Arabic.
Rahim, Abdar . "Two Saints in Bengal : Shaikh Jalal ad-Din Tabrez i
and Shah Jalal." Journal of the Pakistan  Historical  Society 7 (1960).
Rahman, Fazlur . "Dream, Imagination , and calam al-mithal. " Islamic
Studies 3- 4 (1964-65) . Also in The Dream and Human  Societies,
edited by Gustave E. von Grunebau m and Roger Caillois. Berkeley ,
1966.
. Islam. London, 1966.
Ramakrishna, Lajwanti. Panjabi  Sufi Poets. London and Calcutta , 1938.
Rasheed, Ghula m Dastagir . "The Developmen t of Nactia Poetr y in
Persian Literature. " Islamic Culture,  1965.
Raverty, H . G. Selections  from the Poetry of the Afghans.  London, 1862.
Redhouse, Jame s W., trans. The Mesnevi  (usually known as the Mesne-
vlyi sherlf,  or holy Mesnevi)  of Mevlana  (our lord) JelaPu'd-Din
Muhammad, er-Rumi.  Book the First. London, 1881.
Regnier, Yves . Le "d'wdn"  de Yunus Emre. Paris, 1963.
Reinert, Benedikt . Die Lehre vom tawakkul  in der alteren Sufik. Berlin,
1968.
Rice, Cyprian , O. P. The Persian  Sufis. 2d ed. London, 1969.
Richter, Gustav . Dschelaladdin  Rumi. Eine Stildeutung  in drei Vor-
tra'gen. Breslau , 1932.
Ritter, Hellmut . "Die Anfang e der Hurufisekte. " Oriens 7 (1954).
. "Die Ausspriich e des Bayezid Bistami. " In Westostliche  Ab-
handlungen, Festschrift  fur Rudolf Tschudi,  edited by Fritz Meier.
Wiesbaden, 1954 .
. "Al-BIruni' s iibersetzun g des Yoga-Sutr a des Patanjali. " Oriens
9 0956)-
. "Hasan al-Basrl , Studien zur Geschicht e der islamische n From-
migkeit." De r Islam 21 (1933).

--- Page 483 ---
460 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. Das Meer der Seele. Gott, Welt und Mensch in den Geschichten
Farlduddin 'Attars.  Leiden, 1955.
. "Die Mevlanafeie r in Konya vom 11-17. Dezembe r 1960."
Oriens 15 (1962).
. "Muslim Mystics ' Strife with God." Oriens 5 (1952).
. "Neue literatu r iiber Maulana . Calaluddi n Rumi und seinen
orden." Oriens  13-14 (1960-61) .
. "Philologik a X." Der Islam 25 (1936).
. "Philologik a XIV-XVI. " Oriens 11-14 (l9Ql\-
. "Philologik a VIII: Ansari Herewi.—Sena° i Gaznewi. " Der 7s-
^22(1934).
. "Philologik a VII: Arabisch e und persisch e Schrifte n iiber die
profane un d die mystisch e Liebe." Der Islam 21 (1933).
. "Philologik a XI: Maulan a Galaludd m Rumi und sein Kreis."
Der Islam  26 (1937).
. "Philologik a IX: Die vier Suhrawardi. " Der Islam 24-25
(1935-36).
. "Das Proomiu m des Matnawi- i Maulawi. " Zeitschrift  der Deut-
schen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 93 (1932).
. "Der Reigen der 'Tanzende n Derwische. " Zeitschrift  fur Ver-
gleichende Musikwissenschaft i (1933).
trans. Da s Elixier der Gluckseligkeit,  aus den persischen  und
arabischen Quellen  in Auswahl  ubertragen.  Jena, 1923; Cologne ,
1979. Translatio n of al-Ghazzall' s Kimlyd as-sa'dda.
Rizvi, Sye d Athar Abbas. "The Rawshaniyy a Movement. " Abr Nahrain
6 (1965-66) , 7 (1967-68) .
Rosen, Georg . Mesnevi  oder Doppelverse  des Scheich  Mevlana  Dschalal
ad-Din Rumi.  Munich, 1913.
Riickert, Friedrich . Dschelaladdin,  Ghaselen.  N.p., 1819.
Rumi, Maulan a Jalaluddm . Diwdn-i kablr yd Kulliydt-i  Shams. Edited
by Badi cuz-Zaman Furiizanfar . 10 vols. Tehran, 1336 sh./i957 . In
Persian.
. Flhi md flhi. Edited by °Abdul Majid Daryabadi . Azamgarh ,
1928. Edited b y Badr'uz-Zama n Furiizanfar . Tehran, 1338 sh./i959 -
Translated int o Turkish from the Persian original by Meliha Tari-
kahya. Ankara , 1954.
. Mathnawl-i  macnawl. Edite d and translate d by Reynol d A.
Nicholson. 8  vols. Gibb Memoria l Series, n.s. 4. London, 1925-40 .
. Mevlana'nin  Mektuplan.  Translate d by Abdulbak i Golpinarli .
Istanbul, 1964 . In Turkish .
-. Rubd ciydt. Ms. Istanbul Esat Efendi 2693. In Persian .
Rypka, Jan . History of Iranian Literature.  Dordrecht , 1968.
Sachal Sarmast . Dlwdn-i Ashikar.  Edited by Makhdu m Amir Ahmad .
Lahore, 1957 . In Persian .
. Risdlo Sindhi. Edited by Othman Ali Ansari. Karachi, 1958. In
Sindhi.

--- Page 484 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 461
. Siraiki kaldm. Edited by Maulw l Hakim M. Sadiq Ranipuri .
Karachi, 1959 . In Siraiki.
Sadarangani, H . I. Persian Poets of Sind. Karachi, 1956.
Sana3!, Abu^l-Maj d Majdud . Dlwdn. Edited by Mudarri s Razawi . Teh-
ran, 1341 sh./ig62 . In Persian .
. The First Book of the Hadlqatifl-Haqlqat  or the Enclosed  Gar-
den of the Truth of the Hakim Sana'i of Ghazna.  Edited and trans-
lated by Major J. Stephenson . 1908. Reprint. New York, 1971.
. Hadlqat  al-haqlqat  wa sharfat at-tarlqat.  Edited by Mudarri s
Razawi. Tehran , 1329 sh./i95o . In Persian .
-. Mathnawlha.  Edited by Mudarri s Razawi . Tehran , 1348 sh./
1969. Include s Sana?iabad.  In Persian .
Sarraj, Ab u Nasr as-. Kitab al-luma^  fi^t-tasawwuf . Edited by Reynol d A.
Nicholson. Gib b Memoria l Series, no. 22. Leiden and London , 1914.
In Arabic .
Schaeder, Han s Heinrich . Goethes  Erlebnis  des Ostens.  Leipzig, 1938.
. "Hasan al-Basri. " Der Islam 13 (1923).
. "Die islamisch e Lehre vom Vollkommene n Menschen , ihre
Herkunft un d ihre dichterisch e Gestaltung. " Zeitschrift  der Deut-
schen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft 79 (1925).
. "Die persisch e Vorlage von Goethe s Seliger Sehnsucht. " Fest-
schrift E. Spr anger. Berlin, 1942.
-. "Zur Deutun g der islamische n Mystik. " Orientalistische  Litera-
turzeitung 30 (1935).
Schaya, Leon . La doctrine  soufique de I'unite.  Paris, 1962.
Schimmel, Annemarie . "The Activitie s of the Sindhi Adabi Board." Die
Welt des Islams, n.s. 4, nos. 3-4 (1961).
. Aus dem goldenen  Becker.  Turkische  Poesie vom 13. bis 20.
Jahrhundert. Istanbul , 1973.
. Die Bildersprache  Dschelaladdin  Rumis. Walldorf , 1949.
. "Drei tiirkisch e Mystiker : Yunus Emre, Kaygusu z Abdal, Pir
Sultan Abdal. " Mitteilungen  der Deutsch-Tiirkischen  Gesellschaft,
no. 48 (1962).
. Dschelaladdin  Rumi, Aus dem Diwan. Stuttgart , 1964.
. Gabriel's  Wing: A Study into the Religious  Ideas of Sir Mu-
hammad Iqbal.  Leiden, 1963.
. "Die Gestalt des Satan in Muhamma d Iqbal's Werk." Kairos,
no. 2 (1963).
. "Das Geliibd e im tiirkische n Volksglauben. " Die Welt des
Orients, n.s . 6, nos. 1-2.
. Al-Halladsch,  Martyrer  der Gottesliebe.  Cologne , 1969.
. "Ibn Khafif, an Early Representativ e of Sufism. " Journal  of
the Pakistan  Historical  Society, 1959.
. "The Idea of Prayer in the Though t of Iqbal." Moslem  World
48, no. 3(1958) .
. "The Influenc e of Sufism on Indo-Musli m Poetry. " In Anagogic

--- Page 485 ---
462 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Qualities o f Literature,  edited by Joseph P. Strelka . Universit y
Park, Pa. , 1971.
. Islamic Calligraphy.  Leiden, 1970.
. "Islamic Literature s of India." In History  of Indian Literature,
edited by Jan Gonda . Wiesbaden , 1973.
. "The Martyr-Mysti c Hallaj in Sindhi Folk-Poetry. " Numen  9,
no. 3 (1962).
. "Maulan a Rumi's Story on Prayer. " In Yddndme  Jan Rypka.
Edited by Jifi Becka. Prague, 1967.
. Mevldna  Celdlettin  Rumi'nin  §ark ve garpta tesirleri.  Ankara,
1963. In Turkish .
. "Mir Dard's Gedanke n iiber das Verhaltni s von Mystik und
Wort." I n Festgabe  deutscher  Iranisten  zur zjoo-Jahrfeier  Irans,
edited by Wilhelm Eilers. Stuttgart , 1971.
. "Neue Veroffentlichunge n zur Volkskund e von Sind." Die Welt
des Islams,  n.s. 9, nos. 1-4 (1964).
. "Nur ein storrische s Pferd." In Ex orbe Religionum,  Festschrift
Geo Widengren.  Leiden, 1972.
. "The Origin and Early Developmen t of Sufism. " Journal  of
the Pakistan  Historical  Society, 1958.
."The Plac e of the Prophet in Iqbal's Thought. " Islamic Studies
i, no. 4 (1962).
. "Poetry and Calligraphy. " Pakistan  Quarterly  17, no. i (1969).
. "Raymundu s Lullus und seine Auseinandersetzun g mit dem
Islam." Eine  Heilige Kirche i (1953-54) -
. "Der Regen als Symbol in der Religionsgeschichte. " In Reli-
gion und Religionen:  Festschrift  Gustav Mensching.  Bonn, 1966.
. "Rose und Nachtigall. " Numen  5, no. 2 (1958).
. "The Ruby of the Heart." In Zakir Husain Presentation  Vol-
ume, edite d by Malik Ram. New Delhi, 1968.
. "Rumi's Influenc e on Muslim Literature. " In Giildeste.  Konya,
1971-
. "Samih a Ayverdi , eine Istanbule r Schriftstellerin. " In Fest-
schrift Otto  Spies, edited by Wilhelm Hoenerbach . Wiesbaden , 1967.
. "Schah Abdul Latif." Kairos, nos. 3-4 (1961).
. "Schriftsymboli k im Islam." In Festschrift  Ernst Kuhnel,  edited
by Richar d Ettinghausen . Berlin, 1959.
. "Shah cAbdul Latif' s Beschreibun g des wahren Sufi." In Fest-
schrift fiir  Fritz Meier, compiled by Richard Gramlich . Wiesbaden ,
. "Shah clnayat of Jhok: A Sindhi Mystic of the Early i8th Cen-
tury." In Liber Amicorum  in Honour  of C. J. Bleeker.  Leiden, 1969.
. "A Sincere Muhammadan's Way to Salvation." In Memorial
Volume S . F. G. Brandon,  edited by Eric J. Sharpe and John R.
Hinnels. Manchester , 1973.
. "Sindhi Literature. " In History  of Indian Literature,  edited by
Jan Gonda . Wiesbaden , 1974.1974-

--- Page 486 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 463
. "Some Aspects of Mystica l Prayer in Islam." Die Welt des Is-
lams, n.s. 2, no. 2 (1952).
. "Some Glimpse s of the Religiou s Life in Egypt during the Later
Mamluk Period. " Islamic Studies 4, no. 4 (1965).
. "Studien zum Begriff der mystische n Liebe im Islam." Dr. sc.
rel. dissertation , Universit y of Marburg , 1954.
. "Sufismu s und Heiligenverehrun g im spatmittelalterliche n
Agypten." I n Festschrift  fiir W. Caskel,  edited by Erich Graf.
Leiden, 1968 .
. "The Symbolica l Languag e of Maulan a Jalal al-Din Ruml."
Studies in Islam i (1964).
. "Translation s and Commentarie s of the Quran in the Sindhi
Language." Oriens  15 (1963).
. "The Veneratio n of the Prophe t Muhammad , as Reflecte d in
Sindhi Poetry. " In The Saviour  God, edited by Samuel G. F. Bran-
don. Manchester , 1963.
. "Yunus Emre." Numen 8, no. i (1961).
. "Zu einigen Versen Dschelaladdi n Rumis. " Anatolica  i (1967).
. "Zur Biographi c des Abu cAbdallah ib n Chafif as-Sirazi. " Die
Welt des Orients,  1955.
-."Zur Geschicht e der mystische n Liebe im Islam. " Die Welt
des Orients,  1952.
Scholem, Gershom . "Die krypto-jiidisch e Sekte der Donme (Sabbatianer )
in der Tiirkei. " Numen 7, no. i (1960).
Schrieke, Bernhard . "Die Himmelsreis e Muhammads. " Der Islam 6
(1961).
Schroeder, Eric . Muhammad's  People. Portland , Maine, 1955.
Schuon, Frithjof . Dimensions  of Islam. Translate d by Peter N. Town-
send. London , 1970.
. Understanding  Islam. Translate d by D. M. Matheson . 3d ed.
London, 1972 .
Scale, Morri s S. "The Ethics of Malamatly a Sufism and the Sermon of
the Mount. " Moslem  World 58, no. i (1968).
Shabistan, Mahmud . The Dialogue  of the Gulshan-i  Rdz. London ,
1887.
. Gulshan-i  rdz: The Rose-Garden  of Mysteries.  Edited and
translated b y Edward Henry Whinfield . London , 1880.
-. The Secret Garden. Translate d by Juraj Paska. New York and
London, 1969 .
Shah cAbdul Latif . Risdlo. Edited by Kalyan B. Adwani . Bombay , 1958.
In Sindhi .
Shacranl, c Abdul Wahha b ash-. Baydn al-asrdr. Istanbul , Aya Sofya 248.
In Arabic .
. Lawdqih  al-anwdr  al-qudsiyya.  Cairo, 1311 h./i8g3-94 . In
Arabic.
-. Risdla fi talqm adh-dhikr.  Istanbul Universites i Kiitiiphanesi ,
Arab. 3531 . In Arabic.

--- Page 487 ---
464 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sharib, Zahu r U. The Life and Teachings  of Khawaja  Moinud-din
Hasan Chishti.  Ajmer, 1959.
Shaybi, Kami l M. ash-. As-sila bayn at-tasawwuf  wa*t-tashayyu f. Cairo,
ca. 1967. In Arabic .
Shehadi, Fadlou . Ghazdll's  Unique Unknowable  God. Leiden, 1964.
Shibll, Ab u Bakr. Dlwdn. Edited by Kamil M. ash-Shaybi . Cairo, 1967.
In Arabic .
Sipahsalar, Faridu n Ahmad . Risdla dar ahwdl-i  Mauldna  Jaldluddln
Ruml. Edite d by Sacid Nafisi . Tehran , 1325 sh./ig46 . In Persian .
Smith, Margaret . An Early Mystic of Baghdad.  London, 1935.
"Al-Ghazzali, ar-risal a al-laduniyya. " Journal  of the Royal Asia-
tic Society,  1938.
Rdbfa th e Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints  in Islam. Cambridge ,
1928.
Readings from  the Mystics  of Islam. London, 1950.
. Studies in Early Mysticism  in the Near and Middle  East. Lon-
don, 1931 .
The Sufi Path of Love. London, 1954.
Smith, W . Cantwell . "The Crystallizatio n of Religiou s Communitie s in
Mughal India. " In Yddndme-ye  Irdn-e Minorsky.  Tehran, 1969.
Sohbet Dergisi.  Istanbul , 1952-53 . In Turkish .
Sorley, Herber t Tower. Shah Abdul Latif of Bhit: His Poetry,  Life, and
Times. 1940 . Reprint. Oxford , 1966.
Spies, Gertrud . Mahmud  von Ghazna  bei Farld ud'din *Attdr. Basel,
Spies, Otto . "Drei biographisch e Werke iiber Sufis." Le monde oriental,
193°-
Storey, C . A. Persian Literature.  Vol. i. London , 1953.
Subhan, Joh n A. Sufism: Its Saints and Shrines.  2d ed. Lucknow , 1960.
Subki, Tajuddm as-. Tabaqdt ash-shdffiyya al-kubrd. Cairo, 1324 h./
1906-1907. I n Arabic .
Suhrawardi, Shihabuddi n cUmar as- . *Awdrif al-ma cdrif. Bulaq , Egypt,
1289 h./1872-73 . At the margin of Ghazzali' s Ihya*. In Arabic.
The " cAwarif ul-Macarif" written in the thirteenth century by
Shaikh Shahabud-d-Din  Umar bin Muhammad-i  Sahrwardi.  Trans-
lated by H. Wilberforc e Clarke. 1891. Reprint. New York, 1970.
Suhrawardi Maqtul . "Le bruissemen t de 1'aile de Gabriel. " Edited and
translated b y Henry Corbin and Paul Kraus. Journal  asiatique,
Oeuvres e n Persan.  Edited by Henry Corbin . Paris, 1970. In
Persian.
, Opera metaphysica  et mystica. Edited by Henry Corbin . Vol. i.
Istanbul, 1945 . Vol. 2. Tehran and Paris, 1952. In Arabic .
SulamI, c AbduDr Rahma n as-. Kitdb dddb as-suhba.  Edited by Meir J.
Kister. Jerusalem , 1954. In Arabic .
Kitdb al-arba cln. Hyderabad , Deccan , 1950. In Arabic .
Kitdb tabaqdt  as-Sufiyya.  Edited by Nuradd m Shariba . Cairo,July !935 -!959-

--- Page 488 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 465
1953. Edite d by Johanne s Pedersen . Leiden, 1960. In Arabic .
Siileyman Celebi . The Mevlidi  Sherif by Suleyman  Chelebi.  Translate d
by F. Lyman MacCallum . London, 1943.
. Mevlud-i  §erif. Istanbul , n.d. In Turkish .
Sultan Bahoo . Abydt. Translate d by Maqboo l Elahi. Lahore, 1967.
§u§ut, Hasa n Lutfi. Fakir sozleri. Istanbul , 1958. In Turkish .
. Islam tasavvufunda  Hacegdn  Hanedam.  Istanbul , 1958. In
Turkish.
Swartz, Merli n S. Ibn al-Jawzi's  "kitab al-qussa.s  wa^l-mudhakkirin."
Beirut, 1971 . In Arabic .
Taeschner, Franz . "Das futuwa-Rittertu m des islamische n Mittelalters. "
In Beitrage  zur Arabistik,  Semitistik  und Islamkunde,  edited by
Richard Hartman n and H. Scheel. Leipzig, 1944.
. "As-Sulami s kitab al-futuwwa."  In Festschrift  J. Pedersen.  Co-
penhagen, 1953 .
Tahir, Hamza . "At-tasawwu f ash-sha cbi fiDl-adab at-turkl. " Majalla  Kul-
liyyat al-adab  12, no. 2 (1950). In Arabic .
Teufel, Johan n Karl. Eine Lebensbeschreibung  des Scheichs  cAll-i Ha-
maddni. Leiden , 1962.
Tholuck, Friedric h Augus t Deofidus . Bluthensammlung  aus der Mor-
genldndischen Mystik.  Berlin, 1825.
. Ssufismus  sive theosophia  persarum  pantheistica.  Berlin 1821.
Tikku, Girdhar i L. Persian Poetry in Kashmir,  1339-1846:  An Introduc-
tion. Berkeley , 1971.
Tilmidh Husayn . Mir'dt al-mathnawl.  Hyderabad , Deccan , 1352 h./
1933-34. I n Persian .
Trimingham, J . Spencer . The Sufi Orders in Islam. Oxford, 1971.
Trumpp, Ernst . "Einige Bemerkunge n zum Sufismus. " Zeitschrift  der
Deutschen Morgenla'ndischen  Gesellschaft  16 (1862).
. "Sorathi . Ein Sindhi-Gedichtau s dem grossen Divan des Sayyid
cAbd-ul-Latif." Zeitschrift  der Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesell-
schaft 17 (1863).
Tune, Cihad . "Sahl ibn cAbdullah at-Tustar i und die Salimlya. " Ph.D.
dissertation, Universit y of Bonn, 1970.
Umaruddin, Muhammad . The Ethical  Philosophy  of al-Ghazzdll.  Ali-
garh, 1951 .
Underbill, Evelyn . Mysticism:  A Study in the Nature and Development
of Man's Spiritual  Consciousness.  1911. Paperback . New York, 1956.
cUrfi Shirazi , Muhammad . Kulliydt.  Edited by CA1I Jawahiri . Tehran ,
1336 sh./i957 . In Persian .
Usborne, Charle s Frederick . Hir Ranjha.  Edited by Mumta z Hasan.
Karachi, 1966 .
Uzluk, §ehabettin . Mevlevilikte  Resim,  Resimde  Mevleviler.  Ankara,
1957. In Turkish .
Vacca, Virginia . "Aspetti politici e sociali dei 'sufi' musulmani. " Orients
moderne 35 , no. i (1955).

--- Page 489 ---
466 / BIBLIOGRAPHY
. Vile e detti di Santi Musulmani.  Torino, n.d.
Vahiduddin, Syed . Indisch-Moslemische  Werterlebnisse.  Leipzig, 1937.
Vaudeville, Charlotte . Kabir Granthvali.  (Doha). Pondicherry , 1957.
Vryonis, Speros , Jr. The Decline  of Medieval  Hellenism  in Asia Minor
and the Process of Islamization  from the Eleventh  through the Fif-
teenth Century.  Berkeley , 1971.
Waheed Mirza . The Life and Works of Amir Khusru.  3d ed. Lahore,
1962.
Walad, Sultan . Divan-i Sultan Veled. Edited by F. Nafiz Uzluk. Istanbul ,
1941. In Persian .
. Divan-i Turki. Edited by Kilisli Muallim Rifcat. Istanbul , 1341
h./1922-23. I n Turkish .
-. Waladndme.  Edited by Jalal Huma 3!. Tehran , 1315 sh./ig36 . In
Persian.
Wallullah, Shah . Hujjat Allah al-baligha.  Cairo, ca. 1955. In Arabic.
. Lamahdt.  Edited by Ghulam Mustaf a Qasimi . Hyderabad ,
Sind, ca. 1966. In Arabic.
-. Sata cdt. Edite d by Ghulam Mustaf a Qasimi. Hyderabad , Sind,
1964. In Arabic.
Walsh, Joh n R. "Yunus Emre: A Medieva l Hymnodist. " Numen 7, nos.
2-3 (i9 6°)-
Watt, W. Montgomery . The Faith and Practice  of Al-Ghazali.  London,
!953-
. Muslim Intellectual:  A Study of Al-Ghazali.  Edinburgh , 1963.
Wehr, Hans . Al-Ghazdlls  Buch vom Gottvertrauen.  Halle, 1940.
Wellecz, Emmy . Akbar's Religious  Thought  as Reflected  in Moghul
Painting. London , 1952.
Wensinck, Aren d Jan. Abu^l-faraq  Barhebraeus:  The Book of the Dove.
Leiden, 1919 .
. Concordance  et indices de la tradition  musulmane.  Leiden,
1936-71-. "Ghazali' s Mishka t al-anwar. " Semietische  Studien.  Leiden,
1941.
-. La pensee de Ghazzdll.  Paris, 1940.
Whinfield, E . H., trans. "Masnavi-i  Ma^navi":  Spiritual  Couplets.  Lon-
don, 1887 .
Widengren, Geo . The Ascension  to Heaven  and the Heavenly  Book.
Uppsala, 1950 .
. "Harleki n und Monchskutte , Clownhu t und Derwischmtitze. "
Orientalia Suecana  2 (1953)-
. Muhammad,  the Apostle of God, and His Ascension.  Uppsala ,
1955-Wilms, Franz-Elmar , trans. Al-Ghazalls  Schrift wider die Gottheit  Jesu.
Leiden, 1966 .
Wilzer, Susanna . "Untersuchunge n zu Gazzali' s kitab at-tauba. " Der
Islam 32-3 3 (1955-57) -

--- Page 490 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY / 467
Wiistenfeld, Ferdinand . "Die Cufiten in Sud-Arabie n im XI. (XVII)
Jahrhundert." Nachrichten  von der Gesellschaft  der Wissenschaf-
ten zu Gottingen,  Philologisch-historische  Klasse 30, no. i (1883).
Yafici, cAbdallah al- . Raud ar-riydhm.  Cairo, 1332 h./1913-14 . In Arabic.
Yahya, Osman . Histoire et classification  de I'oeuvre  dlbn  cArabl. 2 vols.
Damascus, 1964 .
. "Mission en Turquie : recherche s sur les manuscrit s du Sou-
fisme." Revue  des etudes islamiques,  1958.
"L'oeuvre d e Tirmidi , essai bibliographique. " In Melanges
Louis Massignon.  3 vols. Damascus , 1956-57.
Yunus Emre . Divan. Edited by Abdiilbak i Golpinarh . Istanbul , 1943.
In Turkish .
. Risalat an-nushiyye  ve Divan. Edited by Abdiilbak i Golpinarh .
Istanbul, 1965 . In Turkish .
Zaehner, Rober t C. Hindu and Muslim Mysticism.  London, 1960.
Zarrinkoob, A . H. "Persian Sufism in Its Historica l Perspective. " Iranian
Studies 3, nos. 3-4 (1970).
Ziadah, Nicola s A. Sanusiyah:  A Study of a Revivalist  Movement  in
Islam. Leiden , 1958.
Zolondek, Leon , trans. Book XX of al-Ghazdll's  "Ihya?  cw/wra ad-Din."
Leiden, 1963 .

--- Page 491 ---
This page intentionally left blank 
--- Page 492 ---
ADDENDUM T O
THE BIBLIOGRAPH Y
Since thi s book first appeare d in 1975, many new works
about variou s aspects of Sufism have been published , particularl y in
connection wit h Ibn "Arabl. A somewha t enlarge d Germa n edition of
this book , Mystische  Dimensionen  des Islam (Cologne , 1986), appeare d
in my own translation .
Abdur Rahma n at-tarjumana , cAyisha, trans . Self -Knowledge:  Commen-
taries on Sufi Texts. Tucson, 1979.
Addas, Claude . Ibn 'Arabi ou La Quete du Sou/re Rouge. Paris, 1988.
Algar, Hamid , trans. The Path of God's Bondsmen  from the Beginning  to
the Return.  Delmar, 1982. Translatio n of Najm Daya Razl's
Mirsdd al-'ibdd.
Andrae, Tor . In the Garden of Myrtles. Translate d by Birgitta Sharpe .
Albany, 1987 .
Ansari, 'Abdullah-Ib n fAta Allah . Intimate  Conversations.  Translate d
by Wheeler  M. Thackston , Jr., and Victor Banner . New York,
1978.
Attar, Farlduddln . Muslbatnama:  Le Livre de I'Epreuve.  Translate d by
Isabelle d e Gastines . Paris, 1981.
Austin, R . W. G. The Bezels of Wisdom.  New York, 1980.
Awn, Pete r J. Satan's Tragedy and Redemption:  Iblis in Sufi Psychology.
Leiden, 1983 .
Baljon, J. M. S. Religion and Thought  of Shah Walt Allah Dihlawi (1703—
1762). Leiden , 1986.
Bennigsen, Alexandre , and Lemercier-Quelquejay , Chantal . Le Soufi
et le commissaire:  Les confreries  musulmanes  en URSS. Paris, 1986.
Bowering, Gerhard . The Mystical  Vision of Existence  in Classical  Islam:
The Qur'anic  Hermeneutics  of the Sufi Sahl at-Tustari  (0.283/896) .
Berlin an d New York, 1980.
Bruijn, J. T. P. de. Of Piety and Poetry: The Interaction  of Religion  and
Literature i n the Life and Works of Hakim Sand'i of Ghazna.  Leiden,
.Chittick, William . The Sufi Path of Knowledge:  The Spiritual  Teachings  of
Ibn al-'ArabL  Albany, 1989.
The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings  of Rumi. Albany,
..Chodkiewicz, Michel . Le Sceau des Saints: Prophetic  et saintete dans la
doctrine d'Ibn  'Arabl. Paris, 1986.
4691984.
iQo.S-

--- Page 493 ---
47O / ADDENDUM TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Corbin, Henry . Die smaragdene  Vision. Munich , 1989. Translate d into
German b y Annemari e Schimmel . Originall y publishe d as
L'Homme de  Lumiere.
Dahdal, Nasse r Musa. "Al-Husay n ibn Mansu r Al-Hallag : Vom
Missgeschick de s 'einfache n Sufi' zum Mytho s vom Martyre r al-
Hallag." D.D . dissertation , Erlange n University , 1983.
DailamI, Abul-Hasa n ad-. Kitdb al-alif al-ma'luf.  Translate d by Jean
Claude Vade t as Le Traite d'amour d'al Daylami.  Geneva and Paris,
1980.
Deladriere, Roger . La Profession  de Foi d'Ibn 'Arabl. Paris, 1978.
, trans. Junayd, Enseignement  spirituel:  Traites, lettres, oraisons et
sentences. Paris , 1983.
., trans. Kaldbddhi:  Traite du Soufisme.  Paris, 1981.
Eaton, Richard . Sufis of Bijapur. Princeton , 1978.
Ernst, Carl . Words of Ecstasy in Sufism. Albany, 1985.
Frank, Tamar . " 'Tasawwu f is . . .' On a Type of Mystica l Aphorism. "
Journal o f the American  Oriental Society, 1984.
Ghazzall, Ab u Hamid al-. Freedom  and Fulfillment.  Boston , 1980.
Translation o f al-Munqidh  min ad-dqldl and other treatise s by
Richard McCarthy .
Gramlich, Richard . Die Wunder der Freunde Gottes^. Wiesbaden , 1987.
, trans. Die Gaben der Erkenntnis  des Sihdbuddm  'Umar as-
Suhrawardi. Wiesbaden , 1979.
., trans. Die Lehre von den Stufen der Gottesliebe,  Die Biicher 3i—36
[des Ihyd' *ulum ad-dm] eingeleitet,  ubersetzt und kommentiert.  Wies-
baden, 1985 .
Giizel, Abdurrahman . Kaygusuz  Abdal. 2 vols. Ankara , 1981.
Halman, Tala t S. Mevldna  Celdlettin  Rumi and the Whirling  Dervishes.
Istanbul, 1983 .
, ed. Yunus Emre, and His Mystical Poetry. Bloomington , 1981.
Hussaini, Sye d Shah Khusro . Sayyid Muhammad  al-Husayni  Gisu-
dardz: On Sufism. Delhi, 1983.
Ibn 'Abba d of Ronda. Letters on the Sufi Path. Translate d by John
Renard. Ne w York, 1986.
Ibn 'Arabl . Journey to the Lord of Power. Translatio n of Risdlat al-anwdr
by Rabia Terri Harris. New York, 1980.
Iraqi, Fakhruddin . Divine Flashes. Translate d by William C. Chittick
and Peter L. Wilson. New York, 1982.
Isfarayini, Nuruddin . Le Revelateur  de Mysteres:  Traite de Soufisme.
Translated b y Herman Landolt . Lagrasse , 1986.
Jackson, Paul . The Way of a Sufi. Delhi, 1984.
Jalbani, Ghula m Nabi, trans. Sufism and the Islamic Tradition:  The
Lamahat an d Sataat of Shah Waliullah.  London, 1980.
Jong, Fre d de. Turuq and Turuq-linked  Institutions  in Nineteenth-Cen-
tury Egypt:  A Historical  Study in Administrative  Dimensions  of Islamic
Mysticism. Leiden , 1978.
Kohlberg, Etan . "A Treatis e on Sufism by Abu rAbd al-Rahma n al-

--- Page 494 ---
ADDENDUM TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY / 471
Sulami." Jerusalem  Studies in Arabic and Islam i (1979).
Lambrick, H . T. The Terrorist.  London, 1972.
Lawrence, Bruc e B. Notes from a Distant Flute. London and Tehran ,
1978.
Lazarus-Yafeh, Hava . Studies in al-Ghazali.  Jerusalem , 1975.
Lings, Martin . The Quranic  Art of Calligraphy  and Illumination.  London,
1976.
What Is Sufism? London , 1983.
Maneri, Sharafuddln . The Hundred  Letters. Translate d by Paul Jack-
son. New York, 1980.
Khwdn-i pur  Ni'mat: A Table Laden with Good Things. Translated
by Paul Jackson . Delhi, 1986.
Mason, Herbert . The Death ofHallaj. Notre Dame, 1979.
Massignon, Louis . La Passion  d'al Hosayn ibn Mansour  al-Hallaj.  1922.
2d ed. 4 vols. Paris, 1976. Translate d by Herber t Mason as al-
Hallaj: Mystic  and Martyr of Islam. Princeton , 1982.
Meier, Fritz . Abu Sa'id-i Abu'l Hair: Wirklichkeit  und Legende.  Tehran,
Paris, and Leiden , 1976.
"Tahir as-Sadafi' s vergessen e schrift iiber westlich e heilige
des 6/12. jahrhunderts. " Der Islam 61,1 (1984).
Milson, Menahem . A Sufi Rule for Novices:  Kitdb dddb al-muridln  of Abu
Najib al-Suhrawardi.  Cambridge , Mass., 1973-
Morris, James . "Ibn cArabi and His Interpreters."/0wna / of the Ameri-
can Oriental  Society 106 (1985), 107 (1987).
"The Spiritua l Ascension : Ibn rArabI and the Mifraj." Journal
of the American  Oriental Society 107 (1987), 108 (1988).
Nasafi, 'Azi z an-. Le Livre de I'Homme  Parfait. Translate d by Isabelle de
Gastines. Paris , 1984.
Nurbakhsh, Javad . Sufism. Translate d by William Chittick . New York,
1982. A long list of publication s by Dr. Nurbakhsh , publishe d in
the Khanqah- i Nimatullah i (New York and London) , contain s
very usefu l informatio n about Sufi terminology , historica l ques-
tions, etc . A Sufi encyclopedi a in many volume s is currentl y be-
ing translate d from Persian into English .
Radtke, Bernd . Al-Haklm  at-Tirmidi,  ein islamischer  Theosoph  des 3/9.
Jahrhunderts. Freiburg , 1981.
Rizvi, Sye d Athar Abbas Rizvi. A History of Sufism in India. 2 vols.
Delhi, 1978 .
Roy, Asim . The Islamic Syncretistic  Tradition  in Bengal.  Princeton , 1983.
Schimmel, Annemarie . As through a Veil: Mystical Poetry in Islam. New
York, 1982 .
Bedrdngnisse sind  Teppiche voller Gnaden (Ibn 'Ata Allah's Hi-
kam). Freiburg , 1987.
Calligraphy an d Islamic Culture.  New York, 1984.
, trans. Denn Dein ist das Reich: Gebeete aus dem Islam. Freiburg ,
1978.
"Eros—Heavenly an d Not So Heavenly—i n Sufi Life and

--- Page 495 ---
472 / ADDENDUM TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Thought." I n Afaf L. S. Marsot, ed. Society and the Sexes in Medi-
eval Islam.  Malibu, 1979.
Garten de r Erkenntnis.  1982. 2d ed. Cologne , 1984. A collec-
tion of translation s of Sufi texts.
"The Golde n Chain of Sincere Muhammadans. " In Bruce B.
Lawrence, ed . The Rose and the Rock. Durham , N.C., 1979.
Islam in the Indian Subcontinent.  Leiden, 1980.
Liebe zu dem Einen:  Texte aus dem indischen  Sufismus.  Zurich,
1987.
"Mystical Poetr y in Islam: The Case of Maulan a Jalaladdi n
Rumi." Religion  and Literature  20.1 (Spring 1988).
Pain and Grace: A Study of Two Eighteenth-Century  Indo-Muslim
Mystical Poets.  Leiden, 1976.
"The Primordia l Dot: Some Thought s about Sufi Letter Mys-
ticism "Jerusalem  Studies in Arabic and Islam, 9 (1987).
"Secrecy i n Sufism. " In Kees W. Bolle, ed. Secrecy in Religions.
Leiden, 1987 .
"A Spring Day in Konya accordin g to Jalaludd m Rumi." In
Peter J. Chelkowski , ed. Ruml/Biruni:  The Scholar and the Saint.
New York , 1975.
Stern und Blume: Die Bilderwelt  der persischen  Poesie. Wiesbaden ,
1984.
"The Sufi s and the shahdda."  In Richar d Hovanassia n and
Speros Vryonis , Jr., eds. Islam's Understanding  of Itself. Malibu,
1983-
The Triumphal  Sun: Life and Works of Mowlana  Jalaloddin  Rumi.
1978. 2d ed. London and The Hague , 1980. Translate d into
Persian b y Hasan Lahuti as Shukuh-i  Shams; introductio n by
Allama Ashtiyam . Tehran, 1988.
Und Muhammad  ist Sein Gesandter.  Cologne , 1981. English en-
larged edition : And Muhammad  Is His Messenger.  Chapel Hill,
1985-Von Allem  und vom Einen (Rumi's Flhi mdfihi). Munich , 1988.
"Zur Verwendun g des Halladsch-Motiv s in der indo-persisch -
en Poesie. " In S. H. Nasr, ed. Melanges  Henry Corbin. Tehran,
.
Schuon, Frithjof . Le Soufisme,  voile et quintessence.  Paris, 1980.
§enay, Yola . Schejch Nureddin  Mehmed Cerrahi und sein Orden (1721—
1925). Berlin , 1982.
Shackle, Christopher . Styles and Themes in the Siraiki Mystical Poetry of
Sind. Multan , ca. 1976.
Shaibi, Kami l M. ash-. Al-Halldj  maudu'an  li'l-adab wa'l-funun  al-
'arabiyya wa'sh-sharqiyya.  Bagdad, 1977.
Shushud, Hasa n Lutfi. The Masters of Wisdom of Central Asia. Trans-
lated by M. Holland . London , 1983.
§ukrii Efendi , Zakir. Mecmu'-i  takaya: Die Istanbuler  Derwisch-Konvente
und ihre Schejche. Edited by Klaus Kreiser. Freiburg , 1980.1977-

--- Page 496 ---
ADDENDUM TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY / 473
SulamI, 'Abdur Rahman as-. Jawami* dddb as-sufiyya: fuyub an-nafs wa
muddwdtuha. Edite d by Etan Kohlberg . Jerusalem , 1976.
Kitdb al-futuwwa:  The Book of Sufi Chivalry.  Translate d by
Tosun Bayra k al-Jerrah i al-Halveti . London , 1983.
Sultan, Walad . Kitdb al-ma'drif:  Maitre et disciple. Translate d by Eva de
Vitray-Meyerovitch. Paris , 1982.
Thackston, Wheeler  M., Jr., trans. The Stories of the Prophets  (KisdTs
qisas al-anbiya).  Boston, 1980.
, trans. Shihdbuddm  Suhrawardi:  The Mystical  and Visionary  Trea-
tises. London , 1982.
Weischer, Bern d Manuel , and Wilson , Peter L. Heart's Witness: The
Sufi Quatrains  ofAuhaduddin  Kirmani.  London, 1978.

--- Page 497 ---
474 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
Abu^l-Kalam Azad , 368
Abu-'l-Qasim. Se e Nasrabadi , AbuDl-
Qasim Ibrahi m an-; Qushayri , Abu3!-
Qasim cAbduDl-KarIm al -
Abu-'l-Qasim Haki m as-Samarqand l
(d-953). 42 2
Abu Madya n of Tlemce n (d. 1126), 247,
250, 253
Abu Mazahi m ash-Shirazi , 298
Abu Najib . See Suhrawardi , cAbduDl-
Qahir Ab u Najib as-
Abu Nasr . See Sarraj, Abu Nasr
at-Tusi as -
Abu Nu caym al-Isfaha m (d. 1037), 85
Abu Sa cid. See Kharraz , Abu Sacid
Ahmad al -
Abu Sa cid, Sulta n Mirza (d. 1469), 365
Abu Sa cld ibn AbPl-Khayr , Fadlulla h (d.
1049), 10 n,88,116,211 , 235, 241-44, 433
Abu Sulayman . See DaranI, Abu
Su layman ad-
Abu Tali b al-Makki , Muhamma d (d. 996),
56, 85, 131, 132, 215; Qut al-qulub,  18,
85, 120, 251, 348
Abu Tura b an-Nakhshab i (d. 859), 38, 53,
»i9
Abu cUthman al-Hiri , Sacld (d. 910), 52,
171
cAd, 198
Addb al-muridin  (Suhrawardi) , 122, 245,
35i
Adam, 24 , 55, 69, 72, 140, 153, 188, 193-95,
202, 215, 225, 237, 268, 272, 298, 299,
377, 412, 417, 429, 432; as first Sufi, 16;
son of, 30, 193; as symbol of will, 379
Adana, 33 7
cAdawiyya, al- . See Rabi ca al-cAdawiyya
Adonis ( CA1I Ahma d Sacld), 76
Affifi, Abu Dl-cAla, 26 6
Afghanistan, Afghan , 75, 174, 226, 292,
364, 371, 372, 400, 401
Africa, 26 ; North, 82, 91, 209, 211, 227,
240, 241, 246, 252, 358, 395, 403, 404,
405, 430, 433; Black, 240; East, 241;
West, 241 , 248, 404. See also Maghreb
Agra, 367
Ahmad. Se e Dasuqi, Ahmad ad-; Ibn
Hanbal, Ahmad ; Rifa ci, Ahma d ar-
Ahmad (al-Hashimi) , the Paraclete , 224,
bild mini,  224, 387, 419; Sirhindl' s
speculations about , 369. See also Mu-
hammad, th e Prophet ; Prophet , the
Ahmad al-Badaw i (d. 1278), 249
Ahmad Brelwi , Sayyid (d. 1831), 227, 372,
396> 4°3
Ahmad Ghazzal l (d. 1126), 91, 244, 291,294-95. 298 , 3J3; satanolog y of, 195;
Sawanih, 295 , 296, 361
Ahmad ib n AbPl-Hawar i (d. 851), 31;
wife of, 427
Ahmad ib n Harb (d. 848-49), 111
Ahmad-i Jam , Abu Nasr 2andapi l (d.
1141-42), 36 , 244
Ahmad Khan , Sir Sayyid (d. 1898), 406
Ahmad Khidruy a al-Balkh l (d. 854), 427;
wife of, 427
Ahmad Sha h Abdall Durran i (d. 1773),
372, 400
Ahmad Sirhind i (d. 1624), 203, 263, 363,
367-70, 374 , 403; speculation s of, about
the two ms of Muhammad , 225, 420;
letters of , 356, 373
Ahmad Yasaw i (d. 1167), 176, 329, 364;
Hikam, 32 9
Ahrar, Khwaja . See cUbaydullah Ahra r
Acisha (Muhammad' s wife) (d. 678), 27
Aissawiyya, 20 9
Ajmer, 345 , 346, 360
Akbar (Mogu l emperor ) (d. 1605), 21, 327,
355. 359. 36o, 367, 368, 398, 407
Akhbar al-Halldj,  67
Akhi Evra n (i5th century) , 246
Akhund Darwaz a (d. 1638), 398
Alam (so n of Dard), 381
Alamut, 9 3
cAla:)uddaula. Se e Simnani , cAlaDuddaula
cAla-'uddm (Rumi' s son) (d. 1262), 313
cAla:)uddin Kaykoba d (d. 1236), 257, 312
Albania, 33 9
Aleppo, 82 , 259, 339
Alexandria, 25 0
Algarve, 26 4
CA1I al-Muttaq i al-Hind i (d. 1556), 251
Alifname (Qasi m Kahi), 423
CA1I Hamadham , Sayyid (d. 1385), 242 n,
258, 363
All ibn Abl Talib (d. 661), 29, 68, 82, 107,
317, 338; as transmitte r of esoteri c
knowledge, 27 ; and loud dhikr, 169; as
wait Allah,  199; as fata, 246; and letter
mysticism, 340 , 413, 419, 420; as "lion
of God," 425
CA1I ibn Husayn Waciz Kashif i (d. 1532-
33): Rashahdt,  365
cAli ibn clsa, vizier (d. 946), 68
CAH Shir Nawa Di, Mir (d. 1501), 269, 366
CA1I Shir Qani c, Mir (d. 1789), 398;
Makllname, 38 4
Almohads (1195-1225) , 264
Almoravids (1062-1145) , 264
Amir Khosra u (d. 1325), 63, 350; Dlwan,
35° n

--- Page 498 ---
INDEX OF KORANIC
QUOTATIONS
Sura i, Fdtiha, al-Hamd,  153-54, 207, 208
Sura 2:1, alif-lam-mtm,  416; 2:28, institu-
tion of divine vicegerent , 34, 193; 2:31,
He taugh t
 the names , 188; 2:109,
Whithersoever y e turn, 25, 147, 376;
2:111, Be ,
 and it becomes , 425; 2:148,
God is with those who show patience ,
124; 2:256 , the Throne verse, 425
Sura 3:30 , He elected Adam, 16, 377; 3:36,
Thou shal t
 not speak unto man, 15;
3:163, Do not call them dead, 136; 3:190,
signs for "those with hearts,"  192
Sura 4:82 , Who obeys the messenger ,
obeys God , 223; 4:169, Jesus ... a spirit
from Him , 378
Sura 5:5, I approved for you Islam as re-
ligion, 378 ; 5:59, They do not fear the
blame . . . and He loves them, and they
love Him , 25, 40, 86, 138
Sura 6:103 , The sights do not reach Him,
25
Sura 7:12 , "I am better than he," 66; 7:54,
God's mercy
 is with those who do well,
29; 7:55, rain clouds as signs of mercy,
217; 7:138 , forty-da y preparatio n of
Moses, 103 ; 7:156, the illiterat e Prophet ,
26, 218;
 7:171, Am I not your Lord,
alastu, 24 , 58, 172; 7:179, They are like
animals, 141 , 282
Sura 8:17 , You did not cast, 144
Sura 10:63 , God's friends , no fear upon
them, and they are not sad, 199
Sura 12, Yusuf, 299, 429; 12:45 interpre -
tation of dreams , 378; 12:53, the soul
inciting t o evil, 112
Sura 13:28 , Verily by recollectin g God
the hearts become peaceful , 167
Sura 14:24 , A good word is like a good
tree, 134
Sura 15:29, 1 breathe d into him from My
spirit, 188 , 378
Sura 17:1 , Who traveled by night with His
servant, 27 , 218, 220; 17:72, We hon-
ored the
 children of Adam, 377; 17:110,
Be not loud-voice d in thy worship , 167
Sura 18, The Cave, 105, 190, 202, 204; 18:
10, When
 the young men sought refugein the cave, 246; 18:65, Knowledg e from
Us, 18, 193; 18:109, ^ tne ocean were
ink, 316, 411
Sura 19:2 , When he called upon his Lord,
15; 19:25 fresh, ripe dates, 160
Sura 20, Td-hd, 416; 20:11-21 , dialogu e
between Go d and Moses , 41; 20:12,
Put off thy shoes, 264, 378; 20:14, I am
God, 49
Sura 21:69 , the fire was made "cool and
pleasant," 79,  377; 21:107, We sent him
as a mercy for the worlds, 217
Sura 24:35 , the Light verse, 96, 214
Sura 27:1 , Td-sin, 69, 416; 27:34, When
kings enter
 a city, 130; 27:90, You see
the mountains , 181
Sura 33:40 , Recollec t God often, 167;
33:72, We offered the trust (amdna),
188, 381
Sura 35:16 , You are the poor, and He is
the Rich, 120
Sura 37:107 , And we released him by a
mighty slaughtering , 377
Sura 38:72 , We breathe d into him, 188,
378; 38:75 , I created him by My hands,
377
Sura 39:23 , whose breast was extende d for
Islam, 19 2
Sura 40:62 , Pray, and I shall answer, 156
Sura 41:53 , Our signs in the horizon s and
in themselves , 188, 189, 308
Sura 49:7 , God has made faith belove d
to you, 192
Sura 50:16 , Closer than the jugular vein,
25. "7. 1M> l89> 386
Sura 51:21 , God has put signs, 25
Sura 53, The Star, 221; 53:9, the distanc e
of two bows, 221; 53:11, The heart
(fu^dd) di d not lie, 192
Sura 54:1 , The moon was split, 217
Sura 55:20 , a barrier which they cannot
transgress, 192 ; 55:26, Everythin g is
perishing save  His face, 30, 380
Sura 56:78 , in a hidden book, 361; 56:95,
certain truth , 142
Sura 61:6 , a messenge r after me, with the
name of Ahmad , 224
475

--- Page 499 ---
476 / INDEX OF KORANIC QUOTATIONS
Sura 62:5 , like the donkey who carries
books, 18 , 140
Sura 68:1 , Nun, and By the Pen, 416
Sura 75:2 , the blamin g soul, 86, 112
Sura 78:41 , I wish I were dust and ashes,
3i
Sura 79:24 , I am your highest lord, 66;
79:34, at-tammat  al-kubra,  the greates t
affliction, 254 ; 79:40, who hindere d his
nafs, 112Sura 89:27 , O you soul at peace, return to
your lord , 112
Sura 91, By the sun, 218
Sura 92, By the night, 218
Sura 93, By the mornin g light, 218
Sura 96:19 , Prostrat e and draw near, 153
Sura 102:7 , the eye of certainty , 142
Sura 105, allusion to Abraha , the lord of
the elephant , 113
Sura 112 , confessio n of God's unity, 176

--- Page 500 ---
INDEX O F PROPHETI C
TRADITIONS
(The AM citation gives the location of the full Arabic text of the traditio n in Badi cuz-
Zaman Furuzanfar' s Ahddlth-i  Mathnawl  [Tehran , 1334 sh./ig55]. )
HADITH
Beware o f the firdsa of the faithful , 205
(AM no. 33)
Die befor e ye die, 70, 135, 320, 392 (AM
no. 352)
Could th e reedflut e sing . . . , allusion to:
The faithfu l is like the flute, 116 (AM
no. 728)
The faithfu l is the mirror of the faithful ,
228 (AM no. 104)
The first thing God created . . . , 215 (AM
no. 342)
First tie your camel's knee, 120 (AM no.
20)
Gabriel no t to answer the prayers im-
mediately, 15 8 (AM no. 730)
God and His messenge r should be more
beloved t o the faithfu l than anythin g
else, 131
God create d Adam in His form, 188, 225,
417 (AM no. 346)
God has not created anythin g he loves
more tha n Muhamma d and his
family, 7 0
God has seventy thousan d veils of light
and darkness , 96 (AM no. 128)
God is beautifu l and loves beauty, 291
(AM no. 106)
God kneade d Adam forty days, 16, 188
(AM no. 633)
God mad e dear to me perfum e and
women, 272 , 431 (AM no. 182)
God's grac e precede s His wrath, 128
(AM no. 54)
The hear t of the faithful is between two
fingers of the Merciful , 197, 415 (AM
no. 13)
Hunger i s God's food, 115 (AM no. 460)
I cannot reckon up Thy praise, 126, 162,
222 (AM no. 3)
I feel the breath of the Mercifu l coming
from Yemen , 28, 262 (AM no. 195)If it were permissibl e to prostrat e oneself
before anyon e but God, 435
If ye knew what I know, 31 (AM no. 157)
If you had trust in God as ye ought, 118
(AM no. 535)
I have a time with God, 220 (AM no.
100)
I saw Gabrie l in the form of Dahya
al-Kalbi, 29 0
I saw my Lord in the most beautifu l
form, 290
I saw my Lord . . . with his cap awry, 290
I take refuge with Thee from knowledg e
that profitet h naught , 17
I was a prophet when Adam was still
between wate r and clay, 215 (AM no.
301)
Knowledge ( Cz7m) is the greates t veil, 140
Man is with him whom he loves, 141
(AM no. 482)
Men are asleep, and when they die they
awake, 38 2 (AM no. 222)
Miracles ar e the menstruatio n of men,
212
The mos t afflicted people are the
prophets, 13 6 (AM no. 320)
My eyes sleep, but my heart is awake, 27
(AM no. 188)
My shaytan  has become a Muslim , 113,
196 (AM no. 459)
O Lord, keep me one day full fed and one
day hungry , 15
O Lord, Thou hast commande d me to be
grateful (praye r of Moses), 164
Paradise lie s at the feet of the mothers ,
430 (AM no. 488)
The Pen has dried up, 197, 414 (AM no.
97)
Poverty i s blacknes s of face, 123
Poverty i s my pride, 121, 428 (AM no. 54)
The praye r of the sitting man is worth
half of that of the standin g person, 149
477

--- Page 501 ---
478 / INDEX OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS
Predestination i s the secret of God, 196
Qualify yourselve s with the qualitie s of
God, 6, 142
Red rose created from Muhammad' s
perspiration durin g the ascension , 222
Red rose is part of God's glory, 222, 299
Religion consist s of good advice, 100
(AM no. 282)
Repentance i s a door from the West, no
(AM no. 390)
Ritual praye r is mfraj, 148, 218
Ritual praye r is the key to Paradise , 148
Satan sits in the blood of Adam's children ,
193
The sharPa  are my words . . . , 99
The sheik h in his group is like the
prophet i n his people, 101, 237 (AM
no. 224)
The son is part of his father, 103
The spirit s are like armies, 102 (AM no.
132)
Thy light has extinguishe d my flames, 80,
215 (AM no. 134)
Trust in the wdw's, 420
Water, verdure , and a beautifu l face, 290
When someon e has no sheikh, Satan
becomes hi s sheikh, 103 (AM no. 73)
Wherever you r rizq is=:The rizq seeks
man, 118 (AM no. 538)
Whoever love s and remain s chaste and
dies, dies as a martyr, 138
Who know s himself knows his Lord, 189
(AM no. 529)
Who make s a faithful happy, makes me
happy, 22 9
Who recollect s God among the negligen t
. . . , 168
Who saw me, has seen God, 223 (AM no.
163)
Who want s to sit with God should sit with
the Sufis, 235 (AM no. 635)The worl d is a rotting carcass , 109 (AM
no. 705)
The worl d is ... like a gnat's wing, 110
(AM no. 645)
This worl d is the seedbed for the Other-
world, 10 7 (AM no. 338)
The wors t enemy you have is [the nafs]
between you r sides, 112 (AM no. 17)
You do not call upon a deaf one . . . , 175
HADITH  QUDS
l
Heaven an d earth contain Me not . . . ,
190 (AM no. 63)
I am Ahmad withou t mim, 224, 419
I am the companio n of him who recollect s
Me, 168
I am with those whose hearts are broken
for My sake, 190 (AM no. 466)
If thou hadst not been, lauldka,  215 (AM
no. 546)
I have divided the fatiha between Myself
and My servant , 154
I have created everythin g for you, 189
(AM no. 575)
I was a hidden treasure , 139, 189, 268,
291, 382 (AM no. 70)
My saints are under My domes, 203
(AM no. 131)
These to Hell, and I do not care . . . ,
196 (AM no. 519)
Verily, I have servants . . . who love Me
• • • , 139
Whom M y love kills, for him shall I be
blood money , 136 (AM no. 407)
The wisdo m of My creating you . . . , 29
Hadlth an-nawafil,  My servant ceases not
to draw nigh unto Me by works of su-
pererogative piet y . . . and when I love
him, I am his ear . . ., 43, 133, 144, 27
(AM no. 42)

--- Page 502 ---
INDEX O F NAME S
AND PLACE S
A
Aaron (Harun) , 52
Abbadan, 31 , 56
cAbbas (Muhammad' s uncle, d. ca. 653),
3i
Abbasids (750-1258) , 31, 33-35, 83, 245,
250, 289
cAbdu3l-Ahad Gu l (d. ca. 1700), 374
c,Abdu3l-GhanI an-Nabulus i (d. 1728),
404
cAbdu3l-Hakim Qasim , 249
cAbdu3l-Haqq Dihlawi , Muhaddit h
(d. 1642), 363
cAbdu3l-Karim Bulrriwar o (d. 1623), 390
cAbdu3l-Khaliq Ghijduwan l (d. 1220),
364. 365
cAbdullah-i Ansar l Herewi (d. 1089), 55,
59, 80, 86, 87, 89-91, 121; Manazil  as-sa-3
inn, go; Munajat,  90, 91, 301
cAbdullah ib n Mubara k (d. 797-98), 156
cAbdu3l-Lat!f Bhita 3!, Shah (d. 1752),
113, 169, 195, 217, 234, 300, 327, 383,
387. 3 88> 389-93. 39 6' 397. 4!9! Risdlo,
390-92
^bdu^l-Qadir Gllan i (d. 1166), 36, 89,
159, 247-48 , 364, 374; miracle s of, 18,
208; hymn s in honor of, 386; mother
and aunt of, 430
cAbdu3l-Qadir Jilan I Tanjore , i73n
cAbdu3l-Qadir Khatta k (d. ca. 1700), 400
cAbdu3l-Quddus Gangoh i (d. 1538), 357;
Rushdname, 35 7 n
cAbduDl-Wahhab. Se e Bayati, cAbdu3l-
Wahhab al- ; Shacrani, ^bdu 3!-
Wahhab ash -
cAbdu3l-Wahid ib n Zayd (d. 794), 31
cAbdu3r-Rahim. Se e Girhori , cAbdu3r-
Rahim
cAbdu3r-Rahman (Rahma n Baba)
(d. 1709), 399-401
cAbdu3s-Sabur, Salah : McPsat al-Hallaj,
76,77
^bdu^s-Salam. Se e Ibn Mashish , cAbdu3s-
Salam
cAbhar al- cashiqin. Se e Baqll, Ruzbiha n
Abiward, 3 5
Abraha, \  13Abraham (Ibrahim) , 14, 202, 321, 412; in
the fire, 79, 119, 377, 395; and the angel
of death, 135; as symbol of knowledg e
or the heart, 379
Abu cAbdallah as-Salim i (loth century) ,
199
Abu cAbdu3r-Rahman. Se e Sulami, Abu
cAbdu3r-Rahman as -
Abu CA1I. See Daqqaq , Abu CA1I ad-;
Rudhbarl, Ab u CAH Ahma d ar-
Abu CA1I as-Sind i (gth century) , 47
Abu CA1I Qalandar , Shah (d. 1323), 217,
350
Abu cAmr Muhamma d az-Zujjaj i (d. 959),
2_97
Abu Bakr . See Kalabadhi , Abu Bakr
Muhammad; Kattani , Abu Bakr al-;
Shibli, Ab u Bakr ibn Jahdar ash-;
Warraq, Ab u Bakr al-; Wasiti, Abu
Bakr Muhamma d al-
Abu Bak r (first caliph) (d. 634), 169
Abu Dhar r al-Ghifar i (d. 653), 28
Abu Hafs . See Haddad , Abu Hafs al-;
Suhrawardi, Shihabudd m Abu Hafs
cUmar as -
Abu Hamid . See Ghazzall , Abu Hamid al-
Abu Hamz a Muhamma d as-Sufl (d. 883
or 902), 297
Abu Hanif a (d. 767), 18, 31, 394
Abu Ishaq . See Kazaruni , Abu Ishaq
Ibrahim al -
Abu3l-cAbbas. Se e Mursi, Abu 3!-
cAbbas al -
Abu3l-Adyan, 20 9
Abu3l-cAla. Se e Affifi, Abu 3l-cAla;
Ma'arri, Abul-'Ala.'al -
Abul-Atahiya (d . 815), 146
AbQ3l-Fayd Ihsan , 369 n; Raudat
al-qayyumiyya, 369-7 0
Abu3l-Fazl (d . 1602), 359, 367
Abu3l-Hasan. Se e Daylami , Abu3!-
Hasan ad- ; Kharaqani , Abu3l-Hasan
CAH al-; Shadhili , Abu3l-Hasari c Aliash-
Abu3l-Husayn. Se e Nuri, Abu 3l-Husayn
an-; Sirwani , Abu 3l-Husayn as -
Abu3l-Jannab Ahmad . See Najmuddi n
Kubra, Abu 3l-Jannab Ahma d
479

--- Page 503 ---
480 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
AbuDl-Kalam Azad , 368
Abu3l-Qasim. Se e Nasrabadl , Abu 3!-
Qasim Ibrahi m an-; Qushayri , AbuDl-
Qasim cAbdu3l-Karim al -
AbuDl-Qasim Haki m as-Samarqand l
(d-953). 42 2
Abu Madya n of Tlemce n (d. 1126), 247,
250, 253
Abu Mazahi m ash-Shlrazi , 298
Abu NajTb . See SuhrawardI , cAbdu3!-
Qahir Ab u Najib as-
Abu Nasr . See Sarraj, Abu Nasr
at-TusI as -
Abu Nu caym al-Isfahan l (d. 1037), 85
Abu Sa cid. See Kharraz , Abu Sacid
Ahmad al -
Abu Sa cld, Sulta n Mlrza (d. 1469), 365
Abu Sa cid ibn AbI Dl-Khayr, Fadlulla h (d.
1049), 10 n, 88, 116, 211, 235, 241-44, 433
Abu Sulayman . See Daram, Abu
Sulayman ad -
Abu Tali b al-Makki , Muhamma d (d. 996),
56, 85, 131, 132, 215; Qut al-qulub,  18,
85, 120, 251, 348
Abu Tura b an-Nakhshab i (d. 859), 38, 53,
H9
Abu cUthman al-HIrl , Sacld (d. 910), 52,
171
cAd, 198
Addb al-murldln  (Suhrawardi) , 122, 245,
35i
Adam, 24 , 55, 69, 72, 140, 153, 188, 193-95,
202, 215, 225, 237, 268, 272, 298, 299,
377, 412, 417, 429, 432; as first Sufi, 16;
son of, 30, 193; as symbol of will, 379
Adana, 33 7
cAdawiyya, al- . See Rabi ca al-°Adawiyy a
Adonis ( CA1I Ahma d Sacid), 76
Affifi, AbtJ Dl-cAla, 26 6
Afghanistan, Afghan , 75, 174, 226, 292,
364. 37!.372 , 4°°. 401
Africa, 26 ; North, 82, 91, 209, 211, 227,
240, 241, 246, 252, 358, 395, 403, 404,
405, 430, 433; Black, 240; East, 241;
West, 241 , 248, 404. See also Maghreb
Agra, 367
Ahmad. Se e Dasuql, Ahmad ad-; Ibn
Hanbal, Ahmad ; Rifa cl, Ahma d ar-
Ahmad (al-Hashiml) , the Paraclete , 224,
bila mlm,  224, 387, 419; Sirhindi' s
speculations about , 369. See also Mu-
hammad, th e Prophet ; Prophet , the
Ahmad al-Badaw i (d. 1278), 249
Ahmad Brehvi , Sayyid (d. 1831), 227, 372,
396, 403
Ahmad Ghazzal i (d. 1126), 91, 244, 291,294-95, 298 , 313; satanolog y of, 195;
Sawdnih, 295 , 296, 361
Ahmad ib n AbiPl-Hawar l (d. 851), 31;
wife of, 427
Ahmad ib n Harb (d. 848-49), 111
Ahmad-i Jam , Abu Nasr Zandapi l (d.
1141-42), 36 , 244
Ahmad Khan , Sir Sayyid (d. 1898), 406
Ahmad Khidriiy a al-Balkh i (d. 854), 427;
wife of, 427
Ahmad Sha h Abdall Durrani (d. 1773),
372, 400
Ahmad Sirhind i (d. 1624), 203, 263, 363,
367-70, 374 , 403; speculation s of, about
the two ms of Muhammad , 225, 420;
letters of , 356, 373
Ahmad Yasaw l (d. 1167), 176, 329, 364;
Hikam, 32 9
Ahrar, Khwaja . See cUbaydullah Ahra r
Acisha (Muhammad' s wife) (d. 678), 27
Aissawiyya, 20 9
Ajmer, 345 , 346, 360
Akbar (Mogu l emperor ) (d. 1605), 21, 327,
355. 359- 36o, 367. 368, 398, 407
Akhbdr al-Halldj,  67
Akhi Evra n (isth century) , 246
Akhund Darwaz a (d. 1638), 398
Alam (so n of Dard), 381
Alamut, 9 3
cAIa:>uddaula. Se e Simnani , cAla3uddaula
cAla:)uddin (Rumi' s son) (d. 1262), 313
cAla:)uddin Kaykoba d (d. 1236), 257, 312
Albania, 33 9
Aleppo, 82 , 259, 339
Alexandria, 25 0
Algarve, 26 4
CA1I al-Muttaq i al-Hind l (d. 1556), 251
Alifname (Qasi m Kahi), 423
cAli Hamadhani , Sayyid (d. 1385), 242 n,
258, 3 63
AH ibn Abi Talib (d. 661), 29, 68, 82, 107,
31?. 338; as transmitte r of esoteri c
knowledge, 27 ; and loud dhikr, 169; as
wall Allah,  199; as fata, 246; and letter
mysticism, 340 , 413, 419, 420; as "lion
of God," 425
CA1I ibn Husayn Waciz Kashif ! (d. 1532-
33): Rashahat,  365
CA1I ibn clsa, vizie r (d. 946), 68
CA1I Shir Nawa 3!, Mir (d. 1501), 269, 366
CA1I Shir Qani c, Mir (d. 1789), 398;
Makllndme, 38 4
Almohads (1195-1225) , 264
Almoravids (1062-1145) , 264
Amir Khosra u (d. 1325), 63, 350; Dlwdn,
350 n

--- Page 504 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES / 481
cAmr ibn cUthman al-Makk i (d. 909), 57,
66, 192
Amritsar, 38 8
Amuli. Se e Haydar Amull
Anatolia, 91 , 180, 245, 257, 279, 311, 318,
323, 328, 330, 337-40, 343, 364, 433
Anawati, Per e G-C., 97
cAndal!b. Se e Nasir Muhamma d cAndalib
Andrae, Tor , 10, 216
Angela d i Foligno (d. 1390), 36
Angelus Silesiu s (d.'i677) , 266; Der
Cherubinische Wandersmann,  266 n
Ankara, 247 , 337
Anquetil-Duperron, Abraha m Hyacinth e
(d. 1805), 361
Ansari. Se e cAbdullah-i Ansar i Herewl ;
Bayezid Bistami , Tayfur ibn clsa;
Mlrza Kha n Ansari
Apollo, 17 9
^Aql-i surkh  (Suhraward i Maqtul) , 260
Aq Shamsuddm , Muhamma d (d. 1459),34 2
Arabia, 28 , 76, 82, 412; South, 355
Arabs, 13 , 21, 22, 30, 33, 85, 180, 225, 275,
344. 386
Arberry, A . J., 9, 21, 55, 275, 310; An In-
troduction to  the History of Sufism, 9
Ardabil, 8 3
Aristotle, 93
Asaf Hale t Qelebi, 75, 185
Asamm, al- . See Hatim al-Asam m
Ashcarites, 88-90 , 91, 209
Ashikar. Se e Sachal Sarmast
Ashraf Jihanglr , Sheikh (d. between 1405
and 1415) , 210
Asin Palacios , Miguel, 253
Asrar as-salat  (Ibn Qayyim al-Jauziyya) ,
164
Assassins, 9 3
Astarabadl. Se e Fadlulla h Astarabad i
Asterabad, 33 9
Ataturk, Mustaf a Kemal, 185, 238, 326,
34L 343
Athar (Dard' s brother) , 381
cAttar, Fariduddl n (d. 1220), 11, 18, 19,
37, 62, 64, 74,113, 123, 126, 134, 141, 145,
147, 156, 159, 163, l68, 178, igi, 212,
215, 224, 225, 230, 236, 260, 279, 283,
290, 301, 303-7, 308, 311, 316, 320, 321,
358, 395, 428, 432; Muslbatnama,  46,
190, 304, 305; Mantiq ut-tayr, 70, 269,
303, 304-7 ; Tadhkirat  al-auliyd?,  74,
303, 304, 305; initiatio n of, throug h
Hallaj, 105 , 305; epics of, in, 315;
Ushturname, 191 , 278, 304-5, 307; sa-
tanology of , 195; Ilahlname,  304; mar-
tyrdom of , 394; letter mysticis m of, 415-cAttar, Khwaj a (isth century) , 174
cAttar of Sind. See Sachal Sarmast
Attock, 39 8
Augustine, St . (d. 430), 130; Confessions,
92
Auhaduddin Kirman l (d. 1237), l&l> 3!3
Aurangzeb, 327 , 363; period of, 368, 370,
371, 388, 397, 398, 399; daughte r of,
38°. 433
Averroes (Ib n Rushd) (d. 1198), 92, 264
Awadh (Oudh) , 210
cAwarif al-ma carif (Suhrawardi , Abu
Hafs), 122 , 245, 348
Awaz-i par-i  Jibrll (Suhraward i Maqtul) ,
260
Ayaz, 190 , 292
Ayaz, Sheikh , 390 n
Aybek. Se e Qutbuddl n Aybek
CAynu^l-Qudat Hamadhani , cAbdallah
(d. 1132), 294, 295-96, 313, 363;
Tamhldat, 295 , 296, 351, 370; letters of,
348
Ayverdi, Samiha , 236
Ayyubids (1171-1250) , 232, 245, 259
cAzmi (i6t h century) , 333
Azrail, 37 8
B
Baba Lai Das (i7th century) , 361
Baba Tahi r cUryan (earl y nth century) ,
244
Babur (firs t Mogul ruler) (d. 1530), 292 n,
358. 359- 365
Badakhshi. Se e Molla Shah Badakhsh i
Badauni, c Abdu3l-Qadir (d . 1605), 359
Badawi, c Abdu'r-Rahman, 7 6
Badawi, al- . See Ahmad al-Badaw i
Badawi, Muhamma d Mustafa , 427
Badawiyya, 249 , 280
Badr (battle , 624), 144
Badr al-Hijaz i (i8th century) , 21, 22
Baghdad, 32 , 33, 37, 38, 40, 47-62 passim,
66, 67, 69, 77, 80, 82, 84, 85, 91, 122,
131, 137, 181, 245, 247, 250, 251, 264,
278, 296, 297
Baghdadi, al- . See Abu Hamza Muham -
mad as-Sufi ; Junayd , Abu3l-Qasim
Muhammad al- ; Majdudd m Baghdad i
Baha-'uddin Naqshban d (d. 1390), 364,
365. 374
BahaDuddin Wala d (d. 1230), 311, 312;
Ma^arif, 31 1
Baha3uddin Zakariy a Multan i (d. ca.
1267), 279 , 352-54
Bahmanids (i347~ 1525). 35 l
Bahrain, 67 , 82 21

--- Page 505 ---
482 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
Bahramshah ib n Mas cud of Ghazna
(d. 1157), 301-2
Bakhtiyar KakI , Qutbuddl n (d. 1235), 346
Balim Sulta n (i6th century) , 339
Balkans, 33 9 n
Balkh, 37 , 51, 57, 89, 109, 301, 302, 311
Balkhl, al- . See Rural al-Balkhi , Maulan a
Jalaluddm; Shaql q al-Balkh i
Baloch, 23 9
Balochistan, 248 , 390, 391
Bangla Desh . See Bengal
BaqI billah , Khwaja (d. 1603), 367
Baqli, Ruzbiha n (d. 1209), 21, 79, 116,
124, 127, 145, 172, 182, 188, 196, 226,
291, 292 , 294, 296-99, 301, 307, 313,
361, 395; relation of, with Hallaj, 71,
74, 297, 305; Sharh-i  shathiydt,  145,
297, 298, 395; on saintship , 200, 202,
203; cAbhar al- cdshiqm, 291 , 298; letter
mysticism of , 418, 420
Barak Baba , 335
Barani, Diya DuddIn (d . after 1360), 348
Basra, 31 , 38, 54, 56, 66, 426
BasrI, al- . See Hasan al-Basri ; Maryam
al-Basriyya
Bayatl, cAbdu3l-Wahhab al- , 76
Bayezid Ansar i (d. 1585), 398, 399; Khayr
ul-bayan, 39 8
Bayezid BistamI , Tayfur ibn clsa (d. 874),
42, 47-5 1- 59. 132, »33. 139> 145> 161,
173, 191, 203, 206, 261, 298, 315, 345,
365, 427; intoxicatio n of, 58, 129; rela-
tion of, with Kharaqani , 89, 105; mi'-raj
of, 219
Bayezit I I (Ottoma n emperor ) (d. 1512),
180
Bedil, Mirz a cAbdu3l-Qadir (d . 1721), 117,
153' 3°6. 37L 4/3
Bedil Rohriwar o (d. 1872), 396
Bektash, Hajj i (d. 1338), 338-39
Bektashiyya, 202 , 238, 241, 280, 335, 337-
41, 364, 432; poets and poetry, 74, 153,
159. l89> 333. 395; letter mysticism , 413,
420, 422, 425
Bengal, 51 , 77, 324, 351, 360, 401
Bengali, 193 , 352, 401
Berber, 26 4
Bertels, Y . E., 301
Beyshehir (lake) , 318
Bhit Shah , 383, 390
Bibi Fatim a (nth century) , 433
Bibi Fatim a Hajrani , 434
Bibi Jama l Khatun (d. 1639), 361, 433
Bible, 5, 318, 412
Bijapur, 296 , 361, 370
Bilal ibn Rabah (d. 641), 240
Bilawal, 39 5Birge, Joh n K., 238
BirunI, Ab u Rayhan al- (d. 1048), 345
Bishr ibn al-Harit h al-Hafi (d. 841), 37-38
Bishr ibn Yasin (early nth century) , 244
Bistam (Bastam) , 47, 50, 90
BistamI. Se e Bayezid BistamI
Bluthensammlung (Tholuck) , 9
Book of Kings, 34
Brahman, Chandarbha n (d. 1661), 363
British, 64 , 227, 310, 372, 393, 396
Browne, Edwar d G., 43
Brunner, Constantin , 310
Bu CA1I. See Abu CA1I Qalandar , Shah
Buddha, 3 7
Buhlul ib n cAmr (earl y gth century) , 19,
297
Bukhara, 85 , 354, 364
Bullhe Sha h (d. 1752), 388, 395
Bulrri, 39 7
Burda. Se e Busiri, Sharafuddi n
Muhammad al- ; Kacb ibn Zuhayr
Burhanpur, 38 4
Burhanuddin Muhaqqi q (d. ca. 1241),
312, 314
Bursa, 21 6
Bursali. Se e Isma cil Haqqi Bursali
Burton, Si r Richard (d. 1890), 248, 433
Busiri, Sharafuddi n Muhamma d al-
(d. 1298), 225; Burda, 225
Buthayna, 13 7
Buwaihids (945-1055) , 82
Cairo, 250 , 264, 274, 335, 427
Calcutta, 8
Cappadocia, 31 8
"Captive's Dream , The" (Kipling) , 308
Carmathians, 67 , 82
Caspian Sea , 247
Celebi, Asa f Halet, 75, 185
Central Asia , 34, 67, 74, 175, 254, 329
Central Asian , 149, 257, 359, 365, 366,
424; orders , 176; traditions , 340, 364;
literature, 37 1
Cerulli, Enrico , 75, 219
Ceylon, 258 , 391
Chahar Risala  (Dard), 375, 376
Cherubinische Wandersmann,  Der
(Angelus Silesius) , 266 n
China, 118 , 278
Chinese, n , 67, 278
Chiragh-i Dehlawi , Nasiruddln , 351;
Khayr al-majalis,  347 n, 356
Chishtiyya, 185 , 232, 258, 345, 351, 352,
356. 359. 3Sl. 399. 4°i: saints, 36, 213 n,
224, 296, 327, 345, 347, 348, 350, 360,
370c

--- Page 506 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES / 483
Chittagong, 5 1
Christ, 26 . See also Jesus
Chrysostom, St . (d. 407), 180
Confessions (St . Augustine) , 92
Corbin, Henry , 7, 10, 24, 166, 200, 268,
298, 299
Cordova, 26 4
Crusaders, 93 , 260
D
Dabistan-i madhdhib,  363
Dahya al-Kalbl , 290
DalcPil al-khairdt  (al-Jazuli) , 226
Damascus, 33 , 264, 274, 312, 354
Dante (d. 1321), 219; Divine Comedy,  219,
303
Daqqaq, Ab u CA1I ad- (d. 1015 or 1021),
88, 161-62 ; daughte r of, 427
Daquqi, 15 0
Dara Shiko h (d. 1659), 284, 327, 360-62,
363, 368, 433; Hasandt  al-^drifin,  361,
384; Saflnat  al-auliya 3, 361, Sakinat al-
auliya3, 361 ; Risdla-yi  haqnumd,  361;
Sirr-i akbar,  361
Darani, Ab u Sulayma n ad- (d. 830), 31,
36,117
Dard, Khwaj a Mir (d. 1785), 21, 36, 81,
145, 161, 185, 215, 223 n, 227, 263, 271,
366, 372, 373-83, 388, 403, 404, 433;
QIlm ul-kitdb,  81, 374, 376; on dhikr,
174, 175; father of, 370, 435; Chahdr
risdla, 375 , 376; Wdriddt,  375; Hurmat-i
ghind, 380 ; Diwdn,  381. See also Nasir
Muhammad c Andal!b
Darwin, Charles , 322
Dasuqi, Ahma d ad-, 249
Data Gan j Bakhsh. See Hujwlrl , CAH ibn
cUthman Dat a Ganj Bakhsh
David, 37 7
Daya. See Najmuddi n Daya RazI
Daylami, AbiPl-Hasa n ad-, 418; Kitdb
al-alif, 41 8
Deccan, 351 , 356
Delhi, 21 , 36, 134, 161, 185, 217, 224, 248,
296. 327. 345. 346, 348, 35°. 35 L 356.
370-83 passim , 388, 405, 406, 421, 433,
435
Deoband,372
Dermenghem, Emile , 72, 211, 240, 405
DhuDn-Nun, Thauba n ibn Ibrahi m (d.
859), 6, 15, 42-47, 53, 62, loo, 114, 117,
126, 131, 156, 162, 171, 261, 297, 416,
427
Dihlawl. Se e cAbduDl-Haqq Dihlawl , Mu-
haddith; Chiragh- i Dehlawi , Nasirud -
dln; Hasa n Sijzl Dihlawl ; Waliullah ,
Shah 'Diogenes (d . 323 BC), 282
Dionysius, 17 9
Dlvdn-i Shams-i  Tabriz. See Rumi
al-Balkhl, Maulan a Jalaluddi n
Divine Comedy  (Dante), 219, 303
Divrigi, 18 0
Diwdn. Se e Amir Khosrau ; Dard, Khwaja
Mir; Eshrefogl u Rumi; Ghalib, Mirza
Asadullah; Ib n al-Farid , cUmar; Rum i
al-Balkhl, Maulan a Jalaluddin ; Sultan
Walad
Diwan Giduma l (mid-i8t h century) , 396
Dozy, Reinhar t P., 11
Durrani. Se e Ahmad Shah Abdall
Durrani
Eckhart, Meiste r (d. 1327), 137
Edirne, 18 0
Eflatun Pina n ("Plato' s Spring") , 318
Egypt. 43 . 46, 76. 82, 83, 92, 93, 178, 231,
232, 245, 249, 252, 254; ancient, 66, 261;
Mamluk, 43 2
Egyptian, 8 , 42, 157, 225, 249, 250, 276,
277. 324. 352, 375. 4°4. 4»6, 427. 431
Eliot, T. S., 77
Encyclopaedic der  philosophischen
Wissenschaften (Hegel) , 310
Enneads (Plotinus) , 10
Ephesus, 42 9
Erenlerin bagtndan  (Karaosmanoglu) , 341
Erzerumlu. Se e Ibrahim Haqqi
Erzerumlu
Eshrefoglu Rum i (late i5th century) , 213,
342; Diwdn,  342
Europe, 7 , 8, 47, 70, 165, 279, 362
European, 83 , 187, 249, 345, 360, 405;
literature, 8 ; travelers , 20, 179, 309;
scholars, 64 , 275, 404; languages , 334
European Turkey , 202, 335, 339
Eve, 272, 429
Fabricius, 8
Fadlullah Astarabad i (d. 1398), 339, 412
Fakhruddln. Se e clraql, Fakhruddi n
Fanl Kashmir i (mid-i7t h century) , 363
Farghana, 80 , 346
Fariduddln Ganj- i Shakar (d. 1265), 279,
346-48, 350 , 352, 380, 384; mother of,
346, 430
FarisI, al- . See Salman al-Faris i
Farrukh, Omar , 11
Fars, 66
Fathpur Sikri , 360
Fatima (Muhammad' s daughter ) (d. 633),
82, 426E
F

--- Page 507 ---
484 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
Fatima an-Nishapuriyy a (d. 849), 427
Fatima o f Cordova (late isth century) ,
264, 430
Fatimids (969-1171) , 82, 93
Fawa^id al-fu^dd  (Hasan Sijzi), 356
Fawd?ih al-jamal  (Najmuddl n Kubra) ,
255
Fayzi (d. 1595), 359, 367, 407
Fazlur Rahman , 273
Festival o f Spring (Hastie), 323
Fez, 252
Flhi ma flhi (Rumi), 163, 316
Fihrist (Ib n an-Nadim) , 42, 69
Fra Angelic o (d. 1455), 182
French, 8 , 138, 227, 272; orientalists , 275,
361, 407
Friedmann, Yohanan , 367
Fudayl ib n clyad (d. 803), 35-37
Furuzanfar, Badi cuz-Zaman, 32 7
Fusus al-hikam.  See Ibn cArabl,
Muhyluddm Muhamma d
Futuhdt al-makkiyya  al-. See Ibn cArabI,
Muhyiuddln Muhamma d
Gabriel, 79 , 116, 119, 141, 158, 200, 202,
378; not admitte d in God's presence ,
163, 219, 220; equivalen t to First Intel-
ligence, 224 ; as archetyp e of humanity ,
261-62; in the form of Dahya al-Kalbi ,
290
Gairdner, W . H. Temple , 13, 94, 223
Galata, 32 6
Gangohl. Se e cAbdu3l-Quddus Gangoh l
Genghis Kha n (d. 1227), 311
German, 20 , 142, 265 n, 281, 321, 362; lit-
erature an d poetry , 8, 182, 262, 266,
275, 310; scholars , 9, 44, 64, 390
Germany, 14 4
Geschichte der  schonen  Redekiinste
Persiens (Hammer-Purgstall) , 310
Ghalib, Mirz a Asadulla h (d. 1869), 76,
136, 224, 226, 294, 406, 415, 419; Urdu
Dlwan, 41 5
Ghalib Ded e (d. 1799), 326
Ghauth. Se e Muhamma d Ghauth
Gwaliori
Ghauthl. Se e Muhamma d Ghauth i
Ghauth-i a czam. See cAbduDl-Qadir
Gllani
Ghazna, 88 , 194, 301, 399, 401
Ghaznawids, 88 , 301, 345
Ghazzall, Ab u Hamid al- (d. 1111), 55, 77,
85> 9]-97> I03> 1S°. !32, 133. !34> !35.
139, 156, 157, 196, 215, 223, 231, 252,
259, 294, 307, 415, 428; Al-munqidh,  92;
7/iya3, 94-95 , 97, 120, 127, 133, 146, 156,157, 176, 226, 251, 252, 302, 348; chapter
on love in the Ihya?, 95, 133, 146; Mish-
kdt al-anwdr,  96, 223, 259; chapter on
fear and hope in the Ihya?, 120, 127;
brother of , 245; Risdlat at-tayr, 307
Ghazzall, Ahmad . See Ahmad Ghazzal l
Ghifari, al- . See Abu Dharr al-Ghifar l
Ghijduwani. Se e cAbdu3l-Khaliq
Ghijduwani
Ghulam Khalil , Ahmad (d. 888), 60
Ghuzz, 24 4
Gibraltar, 3 0
Gllani. Se e cAbdu3l-Qadir Gllan i
Ginan (Ismail i religious poems) , 434
Girhori, c Abdu3r-Rahim (d . 1778), 387
Gisudaraz, Muhamma d Bandanawa z (d.
1422), 224 , 290, 296, 351, 358,370; MPrdj
al-^dshiqin, 35 1
Goethe, Johan n Wolfgan g von (d. 1832),
70, 323; West-Ostlicher  Divan, 70
Golconda, 37 0
Goldziher, Ignaz , 11
Golpmarh, Abdulbaki , 322, 330, 336
Gordion, 31 7
Goreme, 31 8
Grangeret d e Lagrange , 275
Greece, 17 9
Greek, 14 , 312, 318; thought and philoso -
phy, 18, 33, 92, 223, 261, 262; monks,
173. See also Hellenisti c
Gujerat, 67 , 355, 370
Gul. See cAbdu3l-Ah.ad Gu l
Gulbarga, 35 1
Gulistdn (Sa cdi), 8
Gulshan, Sa cdullah (d . 1728), 371, 374
GulshanI (d . after 1459), 326
Gulshan-i rdz.  See Iqbal, Sir Muhammad ;
Shabistari, Mahmu d ash-
Gwalior, 36 7
Gwaliori. Se e Muhamma d Ghauth
Gwaliori
H
Hacci Bekta s (village) , 340
Hadda, al- . See Jacfar al-Hadd a
Haddad, Ab u Hafs al- (loth century) , 58,
180
Hadlqat al-haqlqa  (Sana 3!), 125, 285,
301-2
Hadramaut, 35 5 n
Hafi, al-. See Bishr ibn al-Harit h al-Hafi
Hafiz, Muhamma d Shamsuddi n (d. 1389),
8, 134, 163, 288, 309, 406, 417; Dlwdn,
327
Hajji Bayra m (d. 1471?), 247
Hajji Muhamma d (i7th century) :
Nurndma, 40 1G

--- Page 508 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES / 485
Hakim. Se e Abu Dl-Qasim Haki m as-
Samarqandi; Tirmidhi , Muhamma d
ibn CA1I al-Haki m at-
Hala, 390
Halima (Muhammad' s nurse), 213
Hallaj, Husay n ibn Mansii r al- (d. 922),
11, 25, 50, 56, 62-77, 78, 82, 83, 135,
136. !37> '38. !44> !52. !73> J98, 207,
252, 261, 274, 282, 297, 320, 333, 338,
340, 342, 345, 355, 357, 362, 386, 393,
394- 39 6> 4«6, 423, 424; poems of, 33,
62, 65, 165, 322, 412; and the telling of
the secret , 59, 354; Kitdb at-tawasln,  65,
66, 69, 70, 74, 142, 215, 416; Riwayat,
71; initiatio n through , 105, 205; danc-
ing in fetters, 184; satanolog y of, 194,
195, 246; miracles of, 207; prophetolog y
of, 215; letters of, 423. See also Ana/'l-
Haqq; Martyr , of love
Hamadhani. Se e CAH Hamadhani , Sayyid;
cAynu:>l-Qudat Hamadhani , cAbdallah;
Yusuf Hamadhan i
Hamd (so n of Hallaj), 66
Hamdanids, 8 2
Hamdi, Hamdulla h (d. 1503), 429
Hamdun al-Qassa r (d. 884), 87
Hamid ib n al-cAbbas (vizier ) (d. after
' 9*3). 68
Hamidiyya-Shadhiliyya, 25 4 n
Hamlduddln Nagor i (d. 1274), 358;
LawamF, 348 ; Surur as-sudur,  356
Hammer-Purgstall, Josep h von (d. 1856),
translation o f Td^iyya by, 275; transla-
tion of Gulshan-i  rdz by, 281; Ge-
schichte der  schonen  Redekunste  Per-
siens, 310
Hanafi school , 85
Hanbalite school , 54, 89, 120, 221, 247,
273
Hanswi, Jamaluddi n Ahmad (d. 1260),
213 n, 348
Hanuman, 39 4
Harith, al- . See Muhasibl , al-Harit h ibn
Asad al-
Hartmann, Richard , 11
Harun ar-Rashl d (d. 809), 19
Hasan al-Banna 3 (d. 1949), 404
Hasan al-Basr i (d. 728), 30, 31, 54, 117, 428
Hasandt al- cdrifin (Dar a Shikoh) , 361, 384
Hasan ibn CA1I (d. probably 669), 155, 340,
374
Hasan-i Sabba h (d. 1124), 93
Hasan Sijz i Dihlawl (d. 1328), 350, 356;
Fawd^id al-fu^ad,  356
Hashim Sha h (i8th century) , 388
Hastie, William , 310, 323; Festival of
Spring, 32 3Hatim al-Asam m (d. 851), 38
Haydkil an-nur  (Suhraward i Maqtul) , 260
Haydar Amul i (d. after 1385), 417
Heaven. Se e Paradis e
Heddawa, 210 , 241, 250
Hegel, Geor g Wilhelm Friedric h (d. 1831),
310, 406; Encyclopaedic,  310
Heiler, Friedrich , 204
Hell, 30, 38, 52, 80, 107, 161, 177, 196,
205, 332; inhabitant s of, 21; fear of, 39,
no, 127, 131, 333; fears the light of the
believer, 79 , 216; marriage as substitut e
for, 428. See also Fire of Hell; Other-
world; Paradis e
Hellenistic, 56 , 96, 224, 260, 318
Herat, 35 , 55, 86, 89, 90, 91, 301, 365
Herewl. Se e cAbdullah-i Ansar l Herewl
Hermes (Idris) , 202, 261
Hesse, Hermann , 262
Hijaz, 27 4
HijazI, al- . See Badr al-Hijaz i
Hikam. Se e Ahmad Yasawi; Ibn cAta3
Allah al-Iskandari , Tajuddi n Ahmad
Hikmat al-ishrdq  (Suhraward i Maqtul) ,
260
Hilali, Badruddl n (d. 1529): Shah u gadd,
292 n
Hilyat al-auliya 3 (Abu Nucaym
al-Jsfahanl), 8 5
Hindu, 34 , 142, 209, 277, 345, 360, 361,
363, 386, 389, 392, 393, 434, 435; philos-
ophy and mysticism , 47, 357, 362, 388;
ascetics, 170 , 358; conversion , 209; poets,
226, 387, 397; place of worship , 239;
boy as love object, 362, 384, 432
Hindustan, 308 . See also India
Hinglaj, 39 0
Hir, 388, 389, 434
Hirl, al-. See Abu cUthman al-HIrl , Sa^d
Hlr Ranjhd,  384, 388
Hitopadesa, 1 1
Horten, Max , u, 64
Hound of Heaven (Thompson) , 82
Howling Dervishes . See Rifa ciyya
Hujjat al-Hind,  257
Hujwirl, C A1I ibn cUthman Dat a Ganj
Bakhsh (d . ca. 1071), 6, 14, 15, 17, 51,
62, 73, 87, 88-89, 1O3' 110> U1> 122'
126, 129, 130, 131, 132, 146, 147, 152,
199, 206, 290, 345; Kashf al-mahjiib,  88,
348
Humayun (Mogu l emperor ) (d. 1556), 398
Hurrnat-i ghind  (Dard), 380
Hurufi, 74 , 339, 412, 413
Husamuddln (Jeleb l (d. 1284), 315
Husayn ib n CA1I (d. 680), 75, 340, 391

--- Page 509 ---
486 /  INDE X OF NAME S AND PLACE S
Husayn ib n Mansur . See Hallaj,
Husayn ib n Mansu r al-
Husri, Abu 3l-Husayn al - (d. 981), 126, 297
Hyderabad Deccan , 351
Hyderabad Sind , 372 n, 390, 397
Iblis, 193-96 ; tauhld of, 195, 214; as fata,
246. See also Satan
Ibllsname (Sayyi d Sultan) , 193
Ibn cAbbad ar-Rond i (d. 1390), 251, 252-
53; Shark  al-hikam,  252
Ibn al-Farid , cUmar (d . 1235), 8, ion,
154, 274-79 , 281, 431; T&iyya,  154, 275-
77, 278; Diwan,  275; Khamriyya,  275
Ibn al-Fura t (vizier) (d. 924), 68
Ibn al-Jauzi , cAbdu3r-Rahman (d . 1200),
221; Talbls  Iblis, 12 n
Ibn an-Nadi m (d. 995), 65; Fihrist, 42, 69
Ibn ar-Rumi , CA1I (d. ca. 896), 31
Ibn cAqil, CAH (d. 1119), 247
Ibn cArabi, Muhyiuddl n Muhamma d (d.
1240), 7, 80, 106, 154, 200, 209, 246, 257 ,
261 n, 263-74, 278, 300, 301, 312, 318,
354, 37 8, 379> 381, 4°3; 42O, 421; Fusus
al-hikam, 258 , 264, 265, 272, 351, 357,
361, 431; Futuhat,  264, 265, 278; Tarju-
man, 264 , 266, 300; Risdlat al-ahadiyya,
273; Kitdb  al-mabadP,  420; school of,
5, 166, 216, 341; system of, 11, 191,
279785. 328 , 353, 357; khirqa  from
Khidr, 106 ; prophetolog y of, 224; and
concept o f utahdat  al-wujud,  257, 368,
406; attitud e of, toward women , 431.
See also Pantheism ; Theosophy ; Wah-
dat al-wujud
Ibn cAshir (d . 1362-63) , 252
Ibn cAta3, Abu 3l-cAbbas (d . 922), 77, 407,
424
Ibn cAta3 Alla h al-Iskandarl , Tajuddi n
Ahmad (d . 1309), 164, 178, 251; Hikam,
251-52; Lata^if  al-minan,  251
Ibn Battuta , Abu cAbdallah Muhamma d
(d. 1368 or 1377), 246,251
Ibn Hanbal , Ahmad (d. 855), 31, 32
Ibn Khafif , Abu cAbdallah Muhamma d
(d. 982), 83, 84, 88, 112, 116, 122, 170,
182, 221 , 229, 298; relation of, with
Ruwaym, 15 , 59; relatio n of, with
Hallaj, 74 , 297; mother of, 430
Ibn Khaldun , cAbdu3r-Rahman (d . 1406),
252, 264
Ibn Masarr a (d. 931), 250 n, 264
Ibn Mashish , cAbdu->s-Salam (d . 1228), 250
Ibn Qayyi m al-Jauziyya , Abu Bakr (d.
1350): Asrdr  as-$aldt,  164Ibn Qasy l (d. 1151), 264
Ibn Rushd . See Averroe s
Ibn Salim , Abu cAbdallah (d . 909), 56
Ibn Sina , Abu CA1I (Avicenna ) (d. 1037),
19, 180, 260, 261 n, 303, 307; Risala fPl-
cishq, 293
Ibn Taymiyya , Ahmad (d. 1328), 273
Ibrahim al-Qassa r (d. 938), 42
Ibrahim ar-Raqqi , Abu Ishaq (d. 953),
207
Ibrahim Haqq i Erzeruml u (i8th century) ,
343
Ibrahim ib n Adham (d. 776 or 790), 36-37,
109
Ibrahim ib n al-Khawas s (d. 904), 119
IbtidcPname (Sulta n Walad) , 315
Iconium. Se e Konya
Ihya? culum ad-dln.  See Ghazzali , Abu
Hamid al -
Ikhmim, 4 2
llahindme ( cAttar), 30 4
Ilkhanid, 25 7
c//m ul-kitdb  (Dard), 81, 374, 376
Iltutmish (d . 1236), 346
Ilyas, 202
Ilyas, Maulan a (2Oth century) , 405
clmaduddin (discipl e of Multani) , 353
Imam-i rabbanl.  See Ahmad Sirhind l
clnat, Mia n Shah (d. early i8th century) ,
390
clnayat Shahid , Shah (d. 1718), 395, 397
India, 16 , 34, 67, 74, 77, 88, 89, 173, 174,
185, 21O , 221, 224, 226, 227, 232, 240,
245, 251 , 257, 258, 263, 267, 278, 279,
29°. S 2?. 334, 339, 344-402 passim , 405,
413, 430; Muslim , 49, 75, 82, 85, 168,
191, 195, 260, 415, 423, 433, 434; North-
west, 225 , 292; South, 296, 367; Central ,
384; elephan t dreams of, 308
Indian, 26 , 322, 407, 435; influences , 11,
47, 64, 435; poets, 75, 217, 306; Sufis,
145, 170 , 215, 403; miniatures , 208;
Muslims, 212 , 265 n, 406; myth of gopis,
271
Indo-Muslim, 81 , 213 n, 258, 348, 358,
368, 386; languages , 13, 33; saints, 36,
242; poetry , 76, 268
Indonesia, 240 , 241, 354, 355, 405 n, 411,
418
Indo-Pakistan, 163 , 247, 311, 327, 344-
403, 406
Indus River , 207, 355, 398; valley, 30, 47,
67, 76, 82, 383, 391, 396, 397. See also
Sind
Insan al-kamil,  al- (Jili), 280, 281
Interior Castle  (St. Theresa) , 61I

--- Page 510 ---
INDEX OF NAME S AND PLACES / 487
Intiha^nama (Sulta n Walad) , 315
Introduction to  the History of Sufism
(Arberry), 9
Iqbal, Afzal , 322
Iqbal, Sir Muhamma d (d. 1938), 117, 139,
160, 198, 200, 220, 227, 263, 273, 306,
307, 406; attack on Pirism by, 22, 238,
405; Jawidname,  50, 76, 219; relation
of, with Rumi, 155, 322, 323, 327, 328;
satanology of , 193, 195,196; Reconstruc-
tion of Religious  Thought  in Islam,
204; maqdm  of, in Konya, 239; Gulshan-
i raz-i jadid, 281; relation of, with
Hallaj, 40 6
Iran, 33, 57, 74, 75, 88, 91, 100, 145, 217,
281, 285, 296, 304, 338, 360, 393, 400,
433; eastern , 34, 89, 90, 301, 303, 328,
329, 358; western and northwestern , 52,
83, 259; ancient, 261; poets of, 16, 39,
46, 49, 128, 163, 226, 282, 290, 292, 298,
300, 305, 367, 406, 412, 415
Iranian, 9  n, 10, 12, 28, 42, 50, 82, 200,
260, 261, 263, 418
Iraq, 30, 34, 53, 57, 60, 68, 76, 125, 248
clraql, Fakhruddf n (d. 1289), 137, 141,
279, 288, 291, 296, 305, 315, 352-54,357 ;
Lamcfiat, 353 , 354, 361
Iraqian, 14 , 31, 42, 80, 100, 119, 125, 249
clsa Jund Allah (d. 1622), 185
Isfahan!. Se e Abu Nucaym al-Isfahan i
Ishmael (Isma c!l), 14, 378
Ishraqi school , 250 n, 262
Iskandari. Se e Ibn cAta Allah
al-Iskandarl, Tajuddi n Ahmad
Ismail Emr e (d. 1973), 337
Ismacil Haqq i Bursali (d. 1724), 326
Ismaili, 93 , 96, 231, 339, 3590, 434
Ismacll Rusuh l Anqaraw i (d. 1631), 260,
326
Ismac!l Shahid , Shah (d. 1831), 372
Ismail the Safawid (d. 1524), 83, 338, 413
Israfil, 200 , 202, 224, 378
Istanbul, 46 , 217, 236, 248, 341, 343, 405,
435
Istanbul Geceleri  (Ayverdi) , 236
eltri, 325
Iznik, 342
Izutsu, Toshihiko , 11, 143, 417
J
Jacob,124, 37 9
Jacob, Georg , 338 n
Jacfar al- cAydarus (d . 1653), 361
Jacfar al-Hadd a (d. 952), 298
Jacfar as-Sadi q (d. 765), 42, 192; Tafsir,
41, 83, 191; inventio n of jafr by, 412Jacfar at-Tayya r (d. 630-31), 395 n
Jain, 358
Jalaluddin Makhdum- i Jahaniya n
(d. 1382-83) , 354
Jalaluddin Ruml . See Rum! al-Balkhi ,
Maulana Jalaluddi n
Jalaluddin Surkhpus h (d. 1292), 354
Jalaluddin Tabriz ! (d. 1244), 351
Jamali Kanbo h (d. 1535), 221, 357
Jamaluddin. Se e Hanswi , Jamaluddi n
Ahmad
Jaman Chara n (i8th century) , 386 n
Jam!, Maulan a cAbdu'r-Rahman (d .
1492), 6, 7, 38, 62, 87-88, 122, 123, 199,
238, 249, 288, 292, 296, 315, 354, 357,
400, 415, 416, 435; Nafahdt al-uns,  20,
53, 86, 247, 365; LawcPih,  91, 361; con-
nection of , with Naqshbandiyya , 174,
327, 364, 365; poems of, 265, 283, 285;
Tuhfat al-ahrar,  365; Yusuf Zulaykhd,
429
Jamil (d. early 8th century) , 137
Janissaries, 241 , 338, 339, 341
Janjanan. Se e Mazhar Janjana n
Janullah Rizw l (d. 1754), 397
Jawahir al-khamsa  (Muhamma d Ghauth) ,
355
Jawidname (Iqbal) , 50, 76, 219
Jazuli, Ab u cAbdallah al - (d. ca. 1465),
226
Jerusalem, 92 , 106
Jesus ( clsa), 15, 34, 35, 91, 122, 202, 237,
318, 378, 429; compare d to the heart,
168; life-bestowin g breath of, 265; as
symbol o f life, innermos t heart, 379
Jewish, 95 , 195; converts , 337
Jews, 34, 40, 271, 362
Jhok, 395 , 397
Jihanara (Mogu l princess ) (d. 1681), 363,
433
Jihangir (Mogu l emperor ) (d. 1627), 346,
360, 367
Jill, cAbduDl-Kar!m al - (d. between 1408
and 1417) , ion, 198, 223, 224, 280, 281-
82, 422; Al-insdn  al-kamil,  280, 281
Job (Ayyub) , 15, 124, 125, 428
John the Baptist (Yahya) , 15
Joinville, 8
Jonah (Yunus) , 282, 333, 395, 416, 427
Jones, Si r William (d. 1794), 8
Joseph (Yusuf) , 293, 299, 309, 378, 395,
429, 430. See also Zulaykha .
Juan de la Cruz (d. 1591) , 253
Junayd, Abu'l-Qasi m Muhamma d al- (d.
910), 14, 15, 37, 47, 53, 55, 56, 57-59,
60, 61, 66, 78, 80, 101, 104, 110, 120,

--- Page 511 ---
488 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
130, 190, 191, 211, 234, 252, 297, 315;
on the return to the first state, 72, 146,
172; sobriet y of, 58, 83, 181; preferenc e
of, for qabd, 129, 253; on love, 131, 134;
letters of , 423
Juwainl, c AbduDl-Malik al - (imam
al-haramayri) (d . 1083), 91
K
Kaaba, 272 , 277, 286, 407, 424; of faithful
worshiper's heart , 106; comes to Abu
Sacid, 242
Kacb ibn Zuhayr (d. long after 632), 225
Kablr (d. about 1518?), 334, 358
Kaisari, 31 2
Kalabadhi, Ab u Bakr Muhamma d (d.
990 or 994), 14, 85, 143, 172; Kitdb at-
ta^arruf, 85 , 348
Kalila wa Dimna, 317
Kamal th e Jogi, 210
Kanz al-^ummdl  (CA1I al-Muttaqi) , 251
Karachi, 20 7
Karaman (Laranda) , 311
Karaosmanoglu, Yaku b Kadri, 341
Karkh, 53
Karkhi. Se e Macruf al-Karkh i
Karmal, 39 5
Kdrnama-yi Balkh  (Sana 3!), 302
Kashanl. Se e Muhsin Fayd Kashan i
Kashf al-mahjub  (Hujwlri) , 88, 348
Kashgar, 36 5
Kashmir, 258 , 305, 363, 434
Kattani, Ab u Bakr al- (d. 934), 165, 298;
daughter of , 427
Kaygusuz Abda l (itjth century) , 202, 333,
335-37
Kazaruni, Ab u Ishaq Ibrahim al-
(d. 1035), 229; prayers of, 158, 164
Kazvin, 9 3
Kecch, 39 1
Kerbela, 50 , 75, 340, 391
Khalc an-na clayn (Ib n Qasyl), 264
Khalifa c Abdul Hakim , 322
Khalvetiyya, 46 , 342
Khamriyya (Ib n al-Farid) , 275
Khanqah Sa cid as-Su cada (Cairo) , 232
Khaqani, Afdaluddi n Badil (d. 1199), 16,
17, 226, 308
Kharaqan, 9 0
KharaqanI, AbiPl-Hasa n CA1I al- (d. 1034),
16, 31, go, 123, 145, 222, 261, 364; rela-
tion of, with Bayezld , 89-90, 105; wife
of, 428
Kharijite (harurT),  127 n
Kharraz, Ab u Sacid Ahma d al- (d. 899 or
89°). 55- 58> 59. i?1' >9i. »99. 214, 29°:Kitdb al-fardgh  and Kitdb as-sidq, 55;
book on ritual prayer by, 150
Khata3!. Se e Ismail the Safawid
Khatm al-auliya 3 (TirmidhI) , 55, 57, 203
Khattak. Se e cAbduDl-Qadir Khattak ;
Khushhal Kha n Khatta k
Khayr al-majdlis  (Chiragh- i Dehlawi) ,
347 n. 356
Khayr ul-baydn  (Bayezld Ansari) , 398
Khidr, 17 , 102, 119, 165, 166, 202, 212,
427; initiatio n through , 105, 106, 169,
204, 264; destructiv e actions of, 190, 198
Khiva, 25 4
Khorramabad, 24 4
Khosrau Shlrln  (Nizami) , 293
Khurasan, 35 , 52, 66, 67, 80, 125, 241, 242,
301, 328, 339; Sufis of, 38, 51, 87, 115,
156. See also Iran; Iran, eastern; asceti-
cism
Khushhal Kha n Khatta k (d. 1689), 400,
414
Khushqadam, Sulta n (d. 1467): wife of,
249
Khwaja Ahrar . See cUbaydullah Ahra r
Khwaja Mir . See Dard, Khwaja Mir
Khwarizm, 254 , 257
Kierkegaard, S0re n (d. 1855), 76
Kipling, Rudyard , 308
Kirklareli, 20 2
Kirmanl. Se e Auhadudd m KirmanI ;
Nicmatullah-I order ; Shah Kirman l
Kitdb al-fardgh  (Kharraz) , 55
Kitdb al-luma f fpt-tasawwuf  (Sarraj) , 84,
88
Kitdb al-mabddP  wa^l-ghdydt  (Ibn
cArabi), 42 0
Kitdb ar-ri^dya  (MuhasibI) , 251
Kitdb as-sidq  (Kharraz) , 55
Kitdb catf al-alif al-ma^luf  (Daylami) , 418
Kitdb at-ta carruf (Kalabadhi) , 85, 348
Kitdb at-tawdsln.  See Hallaj, Husayn ibn
Mansur al -
Kitdb az-zuhd  (cAbdullah ib n Mubarak) ,
156
Konya, no , 185, 224, 232, 239, 245, 257,
264,312-18, 323,324 , 326, 328, 337,354
Kremer, Alfre d von (d. 1889), n, 64
Krishna, 271 , 434
Kubra. Se e Najmuddi n Kubra,
AbuDl-Jannab Ahma d
Kubrawiyya, 254 , 255, 256, 258; mystics ,
363, 368, 379
Kufa, 18, 31, 35
Lahlji, Muhamma d ibn Yahya (d. 1516),
281, 291L

--- Page 512 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES / 489
Lahore, 88 , 225, 239, 345, 361, 384, 388
Laila, 140 , 163,292,392,431,432 ; name of,
275. 279
Lalla Mimunah , 430
Lai Shahba z Qalanda r (d. 1262), 354-55
Lai Uder o (i7th century) , 387
Lamacat ( clraql), 353 , 354, 361
"Lament o f Satan" (Sana DI), 194, 302
Laranda. Se e Karama n
Latd^if al-minan  (Ibn cAta Allah) , 251
Lawa^ih (Jaml) , 91, 361
LawdmP (Hamlduddi n Nagori) , 348
Lebanon,34, 7 6
Libra della  Scala, 219
Llla Chanesar,  391
Lings, Martin : A Sufi Saint of the
Twentieth Century,  405
"Litany o f the Birds" (Sana DI), 302
Lord's Prayer , 153
Louis IX (d. 1270), 8
Lughat-i murdn  (Suhraward i Maqtul) ,
260
Lull, Ramo n (d. 1316), 7
M
McParif. Se e Baha 3uddm Walad ; Sultan
Walad
Macarrl, Abu 3l-cAlaD al - (d. 1057), 73
Macdonald, Dunca n B., 64
Madho La i Husayn (d. 1593), 384, 388
Maghreb, 35 , 51, 248, 250, 252, 358, 430.
See also Africa, North
Maghrib!. Se e Muslim al-Maghrib i
Maghribi, Muhamma d Tabrizi (d. ca.
1406), 167 , 282
Mahbub-i ilahl . See Nizamudd m Auliya
Mahdawiyya, 35 9
Mahmud o f Ghazna (d. 1030), 89, 190, 292
Mahratta, 372 , 400
Majduddin Baghdad ! (d. 1219), 19, 101,
238; mothe r of, 101, 430
Majnun, 20 , 113, 140, 163, 292, 392, 431,
432
Makhdum-i Jahaniyan . See Jalaludd m
Makhdiim-i Jahaniya n
Makhdum Muhamma d Hashim (d. 1760),
397
Makhdum Nu h (i7th century) , 390
Makkl. Se e Abu Talib al-Makkl , Muham -
mad; cAmr ibn cUthman al-Makk l
Makli Hill , 384, 397
Makl'mame ( CAH Shir Qani 0), 384
Malamatiyya, 86 , 87, 108, 160, 246
Malay, 30 5
Malayan, 285 ; Malaya n archipelago , 37,
77
Malaysia, 123 , 354Malik ibn Anas (d. 795), 31, 42
Malikite school , 42
Malik az-Zahir , al- (Ayyubi d ruler)
(d. 1216), 259
MaDmun (so n of Harun ar-Rashid )
(d. 8ss), W \ -JiJ/* <J+J
Mandzil as-scPirln  (cAbdullah-i Ansari) ,
90
Mandaeans, 3 4
Mango Pir , 207
Mansur. Se e Hallaj, Husayn ibn
Mansiir al -
Mantiq ut-tayr.  See cAttar, Farlduddi n
Maqamdt al-qulub  (Nuri), 60
Maqqari, Abu Dl-cAbbas Ahma d (d. 1631),
250
Marrakesh, 202 , 264
Macruf al-Karkh i (d. 815), 32, 53, 395
Marui, 39 2
Marwand, 35 5
Mary (Maryam) , 35, 38, 168, 268, 318;
virgin birt h of, 26, 218; Koranic stories
about, 160 , 429, 434
Maryam al-Basriyya , 426
Mcfsat al-Hallaj  (cAbduDs-Sabur), 76 , 77
Massignon, Louis , 7, 11, 24, 28, 31, 64-65,
67, 76, 137, 190, 267, 276, 277, 406
Mathnawi. Se e RumI al-Balkhi , Maulan a
Jalaluddin
Matteo, Ignaz o di, 275
Mawaqif wa  mukhatabdt  (Niffari) , 80
Mayhana (Mihna) , 241, 244
Mazdaist, 25 7
Mazhar Janjana n (d. 1782), 372, 381, 388
Mecca, 17 , 35, 37, 56, 66, 67, 89, 113, 222,
276, 290, 424, 431; pilgrimag e to, 106,
229, 264, 388, 425, 430
Medina, 28 , 30, 169, 222
Meer der Seele, Das (Ritter) , 11-12, 304
Mehmet th e Conquero r (d. 1481), 342
Meier, Fritz , 7, 255
Mell, Max : "Die schonen Hande, " 8
Meram, 31 6
Merauli, 34 6
Merinids (mid-i3t h to mid-i5t h century) ,
252
Merkez Efend i (i7th century) , 46
Merw, 37 , 241
Merw-i Taliqan , 35
Merx, Adalbert , 10
Messenger o f God. See Muhammad , the
Prophet
Meshed, 9 1
Mevleviyya, 8 , 179, 183, 185, 234, 241, 309,
324, 325, 326, 328 n, 425. See also Whirl-
ing Dervishe s

--- Page 513 ---
49°/ INDE X OF NAME S AND PLACE S
Mevlud-i Sherif  (Siileyma n Celebi) ,
216-17
Mez, Adam , 64
Mian Mir (d. 1635), 361, 433
Michael, 79 , 202, 378
Midas, 31 7
Micrdj al- cdshiqin (Gisudaraz) , 351
Miran Husai n Shah (d. 1669), 296
Mir Khurd , Muhamma d Mubara k (d.
ipS), 356
"Mirrors fo r Princes, " 304
Mirsdd ul-Hbad  (Daya Razi), 257, 312, 348
Mir Taqi Mir (d. 1810), 289
Mirza Kha n Ansari (early i8th century) ,
398
Mishkat al-anwdr  (Ghazzali) , 96, 223, 259
Misri. See DhiPn-Nun , Thauba n ibn
Ibrahim; Niyaz i Misri
Mistral, Gabriela , 183
Moguls, 29 2 n, 327, 346, 350 n, 358, 359,
360, 363, 367, 368, 370, 371, 397, 423
Mohan Sing h Diwana , 388-89
Mole, Marijan , 86, 267, 368
Molla Sadra , Sadruddi n ShirazI (d. 1640),
263
Molla Sha h Badakhsh i (d. 1661), 361, 363,
433
Momin (d . 1851), 372
Mongols, 31 , 245, 249, 254, 257, 279, 303,
312, 329, 365,384
Monophysite, 3 4
Morgenlandfahrt (Hesse) , 262
Moroccan, 250 , 405
Morocco, 210 , 241, 252. See also Maghreb
Moses (Musa) , 15, 41, 52, 79, 91, 103, 105,
113, 164, 202, 221, 282, 378, 394; rod of,
17, 416; as representativ e of orthodoxy ,
157, 158; as symbol of the sirr, white,
379. See also Pharaoh; Khidr
Muhammad, th e Prophe t (d. 632), 10, 15,
27, 29. 34. 7°- 8o> 91- 113. MO, 144, i94>
213-27, 240 , 262, 297, 306, 338, 378,
401, 403, 412, 434; companion s of, 28,
31; famil y of, 30, 70, 222; uncle of, 31;
light of, 56, 83, 420; ascensio n of, 41; as
seal of prophets , 57, 203, 272; name of,
79. !53' 332, 369. 42o; sayings of, 85,
120, 123, 168, 290; poetry in honor of,
94, 350; preexisten t spirit of, 261; as
manifestation of  al-Hadi,  273; as sym-
bol of existenc e (haqqiyya),  379; m of
name of, 416, 419. See also Ahmad (al-
Hashiml), th e Paraclete ; Prophet , the;
Light, of Muhammad ; M (mzm)
Muhammad Bangash , Khwaja (i8th cen-
tury), 401Muhammad Ghaut h Gwalior i (d. 1562),
355
Muhammad Ghauth i (d. after 1633), 355
Muhammad ib n Da3ud, az-Zahir i (d. 909),
67-68, 13 8
Muhammad ib n Wasi c(ioth century) , 147
Muhammad Jaunpur i the Mahdi (d.
!505), 359
Muhammad Ji w Jan, Sayyid (i7th cen-
tury), 434
Muhammad Ma csum, Pir (d. 1668), 369
Muhammad Parsa , Khwaja (d. 1419),
265, 327
Muhammad Sha h (Mogul emperor ) (d.
1748), 35° n
Muhammad Tughlu q (d. 1353), 356
Muhammad Zubayr , Pir (d. 1740), 370,
374
Muhasibi, al-Harit h ibn Asad al- (d. 857),
38, 42, 54, 58, 86, 108, 117, 124, 149-50,
395; Kitdb  ar-rfaya,  251; letter mysti-
cism of, 417
Muhibb, al- . See Sumnu n ibn Hamza
al-Muhibb
Muhsin Fay d Kashan i (i7th century) , 300
Mucinuddin Chisht i (d. 1236), 279, 345-
46, 351, 360
Mucinuddin Parwan e (d. 1277), 314
Mujaddid-i alf-i  tharii. See Ahmad
Sirhindi
Mukharrimi, al - (i2th century) , 247
Miiller, Augus t (d. 1892), 64
Multan, 67 , 82, 344, 352, 353, 354, 433
Multani. Se e Baha Duddin Zakariy a
Multani
Mumtaz Maha l (d. 1631), 360-61
Munajat ( cAbdullah-i Ansari) , 90, 91, 301
Munqidh min  ad-daldl,  al- (Ghazzali) , 92
Muqatil ib n Sulayma n (d. 767), 214
Muqattam Hill , 274, 335
Murad II I (Ottoma n emperor ) (d. 1595),
342
Murcia, 26 4
Mursi, Abu 3l-cAbbas al - (d. 1287), 251
Muslbatndme ( cAttar), 46 , 190, 304, 305
Muslim al-Maghrib i (d. ca. 900), 207
Muslim Brethren , 404
Muslim Devotions  (Padwick) , 157
Mustafa. Se e Muhammad , the Prophe t
Mutawakkil, al - (Abbasi d caliph) (d. 861),
42
Muctazila, 32 , 42,54
N
Nadir Sha h (d. 1747), 370, 396, 400
Nafahdt al-uns  (JamI), 20, 53, 86, 247, 365

--- Page 514 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES /491
Nafisa, Sayyid a (d. 824), 427
Nagori. Se e Hamiduddl n Nagorl
Nahifl, Siileyma n (d. 1738), 326
Najmuddin Day a RazI (d. 1256), 255, 256,
257. 279_. 3": Mirsad, 257, 312, 348
Najmuddin Kubra , Abu^l-Janna b
Ahmad (d . 1220), 152, 254-56, 257,
279, 311-12 ; Fawd^ih,  255
Nakhshabl. Se e Abu Turab an-Nakhshab i
Ndla-yi CAndalib  (Nasir Muhammad) ,
374, 380, 435
Nallino, Carl o Alfonso , 275
Naqshband. Se e Baha 3uddin Naqshban d
Naqshbandi, 144 , 243, 265, 327, 380, 381,
421. See
 also Ahmad Sirhindl ; Dard,
Khwaja Mir ; Dhikr; Jami, Maulan a
cAbdu3r-Rahman
Naqshbandiyya, 117 , 123, 180, 185, 191,
203, 249,
 250, 257, 258, 285, 329, 359,
363-773. 374 . 396. 397. 401, 402; concen-
tration of ,
 on spiritua l reality, 57, 105,
175, 237; and qurb al-fard^id,  133; and
dhikr, 172 , 174
Nasafi, cAziz an-, i38n, 258 n
Nasir, an- (Abbasi d caliph) (d. 1225), 245,
246, 352
Nasir CA1I Sirhind l (d. 1697), 371
Nasir Muhamma d cAndalib (d . 1758), 370,
373-74. 375 . 4»3. 421. 435= Nala-yi
CAndalib, 374, 380, 435. See also Dard,
Khwaja Mir;
 Tarlqa-yi  muhammadiyya
Nasr, Seyye d Husayn , 10, 263, 268
Nasr al-Qushur i (chamberlain) , 68
Nasrabadl, AbiPl-Qasi m Ibrahi m ar-
(d. 977), 88, 298
Nasruddm Khwaja , 319
Nawa3!. Se e CA1I Shir Nawa'i, Mir
Nazm as-suluk.  See Ibn al-Farid , cUmar
Negro, 181 , 430; cheerfulnes s of, 124; as
symbol of
 questionin g angel, 331
Neslmi, c lmaduddm (d . 1417), 74, 339,
412
Nestorians, 3 4
Nicholson, Reynol d A., 10, 43, 64, 223,
267, 303; on Jill, 198, 281; on Ibn al-
Farid, 275 , 279; on Ruml, 310, 327, 431
Nietzsche,  Friedrich
 (d. 1900), 273
Niffarl, c Abdu3l-Jabbar an - (d. 965), 80-
82, 252, 284; Mawdqif,  80; on prayer ,
154, 165, 173; letter mysticis m of, 411,
417
Nihawand, 5 7
Nile, 45, 249, 251
Nicmatullahl order , 281
Nimrod, 11 9
Nisapurl. Se e Abu cAmr Muhamma d az-Zujjaji; Ab u cUthman al-HIri , Sa'-Id;
Abu Hafs ; Fatima an-Nishapuriyy a
Nishapur, 51 , 52, 74, 84, 89, 111, 303
NiyazI Misr I (d. 1697), 334, 342
Nizami, Ilya s ibn Yiisuf (d. 1209), 293,
308, 415; Khosrau  Shtrtn, 293
Nizami, Khali q Ahmad , 356
Nizamiya madrasa  (Baghdad) , 91
Nizamuddln Auliy a (d. 1325), 279, 327,
348,350,35!.  356
Nizamulmulk
, al-Hasa n ibn CA1I (d.
1092), 90, 91-92, 93
Nizar ibn Mustansir , 93
Noah (Nuh) , 18, 333, 377; as symbol of
power, or nafs, 379
Nur Baba  (Karaosmanoglu) , 341
Nurbakhshiyya, 14 5
Nurl (fishe r maid), 392
Nurl, Abu Dl-Husayn an - (d. 907), 15, 59-
62, 78, 80, 83, 192, 297, 427; Maqdmat
al-qulub, 60 ; on cishq, 137 ; and samd c,
181; miracle
 performe d by, 211; fra-
ternal lov e of, 228
Nur Jiha n (Jihangir' s wife) (d. 1645), 3^7
Nurndma (Hajj l Muhammad) , 401
Nwyia, Paul , 7, 33, 80 n; on Jacfar, 41; on
Kharraz, 55 ; on Nurl, 60; on Niffarl ,
81; new terms used by, 167, 178; on Ibn
cAta Allah , 251, 252
O
Old Testament , 158
Olearius, Ada m (i?th century) , 8
Omar Khayya m (d. 1132), 278, 310, 383,
400
Omarkot,
 392
Omayyads (661-750) , 29, 30, 33, 50
Onder, Mehmet , 313
Oriental Mysticism  (Palmer) , 9
Otherworld, 26 , 30, 38, 107, 108, 162, 176,
212, 243,
 256, 257, 435; renunciatio n of,
40, 48, 121, 255, 334. See also  Hell;
Paradise
Otto, Rudolf , 44
Ottoman empire , 241, 309, 324 , 325, 328,
335, 338,
 339, 34«. 432
Oupnekhat. Se e Upanishad s
Padwick, Constance , 157
Pakpattan, 346 , 348, 384
Palacios, M . Asfn, 253
Palmer, Edwar d Henry (d. 1882), 9
Pakistani, 30 , 82, 151, 239, 384, 429, 433!
poetry, 77 , 389; scholars, 322, 353, 368;
artist, 425.
 See also India; Indo-Muslim ;p

--- Page 515 ---
492 /  INDE X OF NAME S AND PLACE S
Indo-Persian poetry ; Pashto ; Punjab ;
Sind
Panchatantra, 1 1
Panipat, battl e of, 358
Panjabi, 33 , 74, 75, 240, 345, 396, 401,
419; poetry , 76, 224, 326, 371, 383-89,
398, 423. See also Punjab
Paradise, 52 , 80, 133, 140, 176, 196, 205,
332, 362, 395 n; hope for, 38, 39; unim-
portance of , 107, 161; connectio n of
with samd c, 183, 185; lost, 189, 262. See
also Otherworld ; Hell
Pascal, Blais e (d. 1662), 81
Pathans, 75 , 239, 399, 400, 414
Persian, 28 , 33, 34, 93, 209, 244, 261, 263,
276, 288, 340, 345, 362, 370, 388, 392,
414, 425, 427; language , 12 n, 13, 26,
74, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 101, 148, 163, 220,
225, 246, 251, 257, 258, 260, 279, 289,
312, 315, 324, 337, 338, 351, 355, 358,
359. 3 61. 367. 39 6. 401, 413. 420: Sufis,
47, 107, 252, 417, 428; lady in Mecca,
264, 431; meters, 330, 385, 398; transla-
tion of the Koran into, 372
Peshawari, 38 6
Pharaoh (Fir caun), 52 , 79, 282, 394; and
Satan, 66 , 246; as symbol of the nafs,
113. See also Moses
Pir-i dastgir.  See cAbdu3l-Qadir Gllan I
Pir-i Roshan . See Bayezid Ansarl
Pir Sulta n Abdal (d. ca. 1560), 202, 338
Plato (d. 347 BC), 261, 318
Plotinus (d . 270), 5; Enneads,  10
Pocock, Edwar d (d. 1691), 64
Porphyry (d . 304), 10
Portugal, 26 4
Prophet, the , 19, 30, 36, 39, 44, 95, 102,
121, 126, 149, 157, 169, 210, 213-26,
229, 231, 237, 240, 265, 268, 273, 282,
312, 317, 332, 374, 375, 378, 379, 416,
419, 420; in dreams , 14, 91, 277; sayings
of, 17, 99, 102, 107, 118, 121, 131, 138,
141, 148, 162, 175, 235, 430; silsila
traced bac k to, 24, 169, 234; as ummi
(illiterate), 26 ; married life of, 36, 426,
431; mi cra; of, 48, 204; grandson of, 50,
155; as rain, 61; literatur e and poetry
in honor of, 69, 302, 325, 351, 357, 387,
391, 397, 401; family of, 82, 427; prayer
for, 160; and love of cats, 210; cousin
of, 395 n. See also Muhammad , the
Prophet; Ahmad , the Paraclete ; Hadlth
Psalms, 118 , 361
Punhun, 39 1
Punjab, 169 , 327, 346, 350, 372, 383, 384,
385, 387, 388, 396, 433, 434; poetry in,
399, 420. See also PanjabiO
QadlQadan(d. 1551) , 389
Qadiriyya, 123 , 241, 244, 248, 258, 281,
342, 354, 361, 363, 372, 384, 433
Qaf, Mount , 260, 421
Qairuwan, 26 2
Qalandar. Se e Abu CA1I Qalandar , Shah;
Lai Shahba z Qalanda r
Qarani, al- . See Uways
QasimI, Maulan a Ghulam Mustafa , 372 n
Qasim Kahl , Maulan a (d. 1582), 423
Qassar. Se e Ibrahim al-Qassar ; Hamdu n
al-Qassar
Qisas al-anbiya 3, 222
Qonawi. Se e Sadrudd m Qonaw l
Qushayri, Abu-'l-Qasi m cAbduDl-Karim
al- (d. 1074), 53, 88, 89, 158, 162, 173,
199; Risala,  18, 88, 246, 302, 348; Tar-
tlb as-suluk,  on dhikr, 173; wife of, 427
Qut al-qulub.  See Abu Talib al-Makki ,
Muhammad
Qutbuddin. Se e Bakhtiya r Kaki,
Qutbuddin
Qutbuddin Aybe k (d. 1206), 346
R
Rababname (Sulta n Walad) , 315
Rabica al- cAdawiyya (d . 801), 36, 38-40,
41. 45. 53. 6o- 78- 426, 435'. legend of,
8; as vegetarian , 358
Rabica ash-Shamiyy a (gth century) , 427
Rabicaddin, Qad i (<5th century) , 210
Rahman, Fazlur . See Fazlur Rahma n
Rahman Baba . See ^bdu-'r-Rahma n
Rajputana, 34 5
Ranjha, 388 , 389
Raqqa, 60
Raqql. Se e Ibrahim ar-Raqql , Abu Ishaq
Rashahat c ayn al-hayat  (cAli ibn Husayn) ,
365
Rashdi, Sayyi d Hussamuddin , 398 n
Raud ar-riyahtn  (Yafi ci), 207
Rayy, 42, 51-53, 183
Razi. See Yahya ibn Mu cadh ar-RazI ;
Yusuf ibn Husayn ar-Raz i
Reconstruction of  Religious  Thought  in
Islam (Iqbal) , 204
Red Sea, 113
Redhouse, Si r James W. (d. 1892), 310
Reinert, Benedikt , 12, 117
Rifaci, Ahma d ar- (d. 1178), 248
Rifaciyya, 236 ; dhikr of, 8, 176, 248; mir-
acles performe d by, 209, 248
Rihana al-Walih a (gth century) , 426
Rilke, Raine r Maria, 266; Das Stunden-
buch, 266 n
Risala al-ahadiyya  (Ibn cArabI), 27 3

--- Page 516 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES /493
Risala al-qushayriyya  (Qushayri) , 18, 88,
246, 302, 348
Risala at-tayr  (Ghazzali) , 307
Risala ft 3l-cishq (Ib n Sina), 293
Risdla-yi haqnuma  (Dara Shikoh) , 361
Risdla-yi wdlidiyya  (cUbaydullah Ahrar) ,
359. See also Babur
Ritter, Hellmut , 11, 47, 304, 336; Das
Meer der Seele, 11-12, 304
Riwayat (Hallaj) , 71
Rohri, 396 , 397
Ronda, 251 , 252
Rosenzweig-Schwannau, Vincen z von, 310
Roshaniyya, 39 8
Rosicrucians, 26 2
Riickert, Friedric h (d. 1866), 310, 321
Rudhbari, Ab u CA1I Ahma d ar- (d. 934),
54
Rum. See Anatolia ; Seljukid s
Rumeli, 339
RumI al-Balkhi , Maulan a Jalaludd m (d.
1273), 3, 10, 16, 18, 35, 39, 60, 99, 107,
HO, 113, 114, 115, Il6, 122, 128, l88, 189,
190, 195, 197, 198, 200, 204, 205, 252,
257, 271, 278, 279, 282, 284, 302, 303,
306, 307, 308, 309-28, 329, 330, 331,
354- 359
 n> 383. 393. 395' Mathnawl,
36, 50, 85, 123, 159, 163, 166, 204, 213,
226, 234, 260, 310, 311, 314, 315, 316,
317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 324, 325, 326,
327, 392, 396, 429; connectio n of, with
Hallaj, 60 , 74, 75; on prayer , 81, 150,
155, 157, 158, 163, 165, 166; mausoleu m
of, no, 239; on the nafs, 113, 114; on
love, 134 , 139, 291, 292, 293; on fana,
143, 145; Diwdn, 163, 310, 320, 327; Flhi
ma fihi, 163, 316; on dhikr, 168; on
samdc, 183-85 ; prophetolog y of, 213,
214, 217, 224, 226; letter mysticis m of,
414, 415, 416, 418, 420; on women , 428,
429.431
RumI of Punjab. See Bullhe Shah
Rundi. Se e Ibn cAbbad ar-Rond i
Ruwaym ib n Ahmad , Abu Muhamma d
(d. 915), 15, 59, 110, 235, 297
Ruzbihan. Se e Baqli, Ruzbiha n
Sabbatay Zwi , 337
Sachal Sarmas t (d. 1826), 383, 393-96, 397,
399
Sacy, Silvestr e de (d. 1838), 275
Sacdi, Muslihuddl n (d. 1292), 8, 400;
Gulistdn, 8
Sadiquain, 42 5
Sadruddin Qonaw i (d. 1274), 279, 312,315, 354; as interprete r of Ibn cArabi,
264, 318
Sacduddln Hamuy a (i4th century) , 421
Sacdullah. Se e Gulshan , Sacdullah
Safawid dynast y (1501-1738) , 83, 326, 338,
4i3
Saflnat al-auliya 3 (Dara Shikoh) , 361
Safir-i Slmurgh  (Suhraward I Maqtul) , 260
Sahl at-Tustari , Ibn cAbdallah (d . 896),
15, 55-57 , 100, 120, 127, 261; relation
of, with Hallaj, 66; and forgettin g of
sins, 110 ; on dhikr, 168, 169, 173; on
saintship, 199 ; on the light of Muham -
mad, 215 ; letter mysticis m of, 417
Sacid Farghan i (d. after 1273), 315
Saklnat al-auliyd^  (Dara Shikoh) , 361
Saladin, al-Mali k an-Nasi r (d. 1193), 232,
260
Salahuddln Zarku b (d. 1258), 314-15
Sale, 252
Saliml. Se e Abu cAbdallah as-Salim i
Salimiyya, 56 , 85
Salma, 275 , 279, 431
Salman al-Faris i (the barber) (d. 656), 28
Samarqandl. Se e Abu 3l-Qasim Haki m
as-Samarqandl
Sana3!, Abu Dl-Majd Majdu d (d. 1131), 18,
19, 50, 76, 107, 113, 118, 124, 126, 144,
147, 195, 202, 232, 285, 301-303 , 306,
3". 3!5. 3»7. 320, 399. 407; Hadlqa,
125, 285, 301-2; "Lamen t of Satan,"
194, 302; prophetolog y of, 215, 218, 226;
"Litany o f the Birds," 302, 308; Sayr
al-'-ibdd, 302 ; Karndma,  302; letter mys-
ticism of, 416, 420; on women , 426, 427
Sancan, Sheikh , 269, 305, 395, 432
Sanusiyya, 227 , 403, 404
Saqatl. Se e Sari as-Saqati , AbuDl-Hasan
Sarakhs, 35 , 241, 301
Sargodha, 38 8
Sari as-Saqati , Abu-'l-Hasa n (d. ca. 867),
53-54. 55 . 57. 60, 131, 395; letter mysti-
cism of, 420
Sarmad (d . 1661), satanolog y of, 195;
"martyr o f love," 362, 363, 394
Sarmast. Se e Sachal Sarmast
Sarosh, 200 , 202
Sarraj, Ab u Nasr at-Tusi as- (d. 988), 49,
84-85, 88 , 127, 147-48; Kitdb al-luma*,
84,88
Sassul, 108 , 300, 391, 392, 393, 434
Sassul Punhun,  391
Sata^dt (Waliullah) , 169
Satan,103, 165 , 180, 193-96, 212, 249, 290,
347. 377. 389. 4lg; "I" of, 55, 66; as the
true monotheist , 69, 194, 195, 295, 302;
as manifestatio n of al-Mudill,  273; ass

--- Page 517 ---
494 INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
symbol o f intellect , 432; influence s of,
256, 357. See also Iblis
Sawanih (Ahma d Ghazzali) , 295, 296, 361
Saygun, Adnan : Yunus Emre Oratoryosu,
329
Sayr al-^ibad  ila^l-ma^ad  (Sana DI), 302
Sayyid Sulta n (i7th century) , 193
Schaeder, Han s Heinrich , 65, 274
Scholem, Gershom , 337
"Schonen Hande , Die" (Mell), 8
Schreiner, Max , 64
Sehwan, 35 5
Selim Yavu z (Ottoma n emperor )
(d. 1520) , 338
Seljukids, 88-90 , 91, 93; Rum Seljukids ,
245, 257, 264, 311, 312, 328, 329
Sermon o n the Mount , 35
Seven Sleepers , 202, 246, 308
Shabistarl, Mahmu d ash- (d. 1320):
Gulshan-i rdz,  280, 281, 291
Shadhili, Abu Dl-Hasan C A1I ash- (d. 1258),
250-51; dream s of Ghazzall , 91,97; Hizb
ul-bahr, 178 , 250
Shadhiliyya, 178 , 241, 249-51, 252, 254,
280, 374, 404
Shafici, Muhamma d ibn Idris (d. 820), 18,
31
Shafiite school , 54, 57
Shah. Se e cAbdu3l-KarIm Bulrriwaro ;
cAbduDl-Latif Bhita 3!, Shah; cAbu CAH
Qalandar, Shah ; clnayat Shahid , Shah;
Ismacil Shahid , Shah
Shaha jo risalo (cAbduDl-Latif), 390-9 2
Shah cAlam II (Aftab) (d. 1806), 380
Shah Jiha n (d. 1659), 327, 360, 363, 433
Shah Kirman i (d. after 880), 52, 115
Shah u gada (Hilali), 292 n
Shaibani (Uzbe g ruler) (d. 1510), 224
Shamanism, 173 ; traces of, 176, 340
Shamsuddin Ik i (d. after 1273), 315
Shamsuddln Tabriz i (d. 1248), 313, 314,
315, 320, 324, 392; legend of, in India,
75. 327. 395
Shankara (d . 820), 5
Shaqiq al-Balkh i (d. 809), 38, 60, 115, 117
Shacrani, c Abdu3l-Wahhab (d . 1565), 249,
352, 375, 404; on prayer and dhikr, 46,
157. 174
Shark al-hikam  (Ibn cAbbad), 25 2
Sharh-i shathiyat  (Baqli), 145, 297, 298,
395
Shattariyya, 35 5
Shaykh al-akbar,  al-. See Ibn cArabi,
Muhyiuddin Muhamma d
Shaykh al-ishraq.  See Suhraward i Maqtul ,
Shihabuddin Yahy a
Shia, 28, 31, 68, 82, 93, 199, 262, 305, 340,387, 426; sixth imam,  41, 412; relation s
with Sufis , 42, 56, 83, 200, 223, 338, 339;
rulers, 82 ; imam and qutb, 200; enmity
of Naqshbandiyy a for, 367, 372; letter
mysticism, 413 , 418, 420, 425. See also
Ismaili
Shibanid Uzbegs , 365
Shibli, Ab u Bakr ibn Jahdar ash- (d. 945),
77-80, 82 , 101, 136, 139, 147, 148, 172,
211, 212 , 297, 412, 424; paradoxe s of,
16, 40, 83; throws rose at Hallaj, 68,
aa8»J tj
Shibli Nu cmani (d . 1914), 322
Shiraz, 59 , 74, 83, 141, 221, 229, 263, 294,
296. 297. 3°9
Shirazi. Se e Abu Mazahi m ash-Shirazi ;
Baqli, Ruzbihan ; Hafiz, Muhamma d
Shamsuddin; Ib n Khafif , Abu cAbdal-
lah Muhammad ; Molla Sadra, Sadrud-
din Shiraz i
Shiva, 35 5
Sialkot, 36 7
Siharfi. Se e Golden  Alphabe t
Sijzi. See Hasan Sijzi Dihlaw i
Sikh: figh t against , 372, 396, 400; mysti-
cism, 434
Simnani, c Ala3uddaula (d . 1336), 170, 255,
421; on saintship , 203, 204; criticism of
Ibn cArabi by , 257, 368; on relatio n of
prophets an d latlPif, 379
Sinai, 41, 391
Sind, 30, 47, 67, 113, 140, 169, 185, 195,
209, 217 , 234, 248, 300, 327, 344, 345,
355' 361 , 383, 384, 385, 387, 396, 397,
399, 401, 420, 423, 424, 433, 434. See also
Indus River ; Pakista n
Sindi. Se e Abu cAli as-Sind i
Sinkiang, 17 5
Sirhindi. Se e Ahmad Sirhindi ; Nasir cAli
Sirhindi
Sirr-i Akbar.  See Upanishad s
Sir Sayyid . See Ahmad Khan, Sir Sayyid
Sirwani, Abu 3l-Husayn as- , 297
Sistan, 345 , 355
Sivas, 257 , 312, 338
Siyah Kalam , 335
Siyar al-auliya?  (Mir Khurd) , 356
Slave Dynast y of Delhi (1206-96) , 346
Smith, Margaret , 10, 426
Soderblom, Nathan , 204
Sohni, 391 , 393, 434
Sohrii Mehanval,  384, 391
Solomon, 121 , 377; served by the wind,
198, 218; with animals , 260, 306
Song of Songs, 434
Sorley, Herber t Tower , 393

--- Page 518 ---
INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES /495
Ssufismus sive  theosophia  persarum
pantheistica (Tholuck) , 9
Stundenbuch, Da s (Rilke), 266 n
Subbuhi, 29 7
Subki, Tajudd m (d. 1371), 206
Sufi, as-. See Abu Hamza as-Sufi; Abu
Hashim as-Suf i
Sufi Saint  of the Twentieth  Century
(Lings), 40 5
Suhrawardi, ^bdu^-Qahi r Abu Najib as-
(d. n_68), 244-45, 246, 252, 255, 260,
345; Addb  al-murldln,  122,
 245, 351
Suhrawardi, Shihabuddl n Abu Hafs
cUmar as- (d. 1234), 17, 182, 260, 351,
352, 353;
 cAu>arif, 122 , 245, 348
Suhrawardi Maqtul , Shihabuddl n Yahya
(d. 1191), 244 n, 257, 259-63, 411; <Aql-i
surkh, Awdz-i  par-i Jibrll, Haydkil an-
nur, Hikmat  al-ishrdq,  Lughat-i  mu-
rdn, Saflr-l  Slmurgh,  Waridat,  260
Suhrawardiyya, 241 , 244, 245, 258, 259,
351-
 352. 354. 387- 390.39 7
SulamI, Ab u cAbdu3r-Rahman as - (d.
1021), 85-88 , 90, 241, 255; Tafslr, 41, 71;
Tabaqat, 85 , 90; Risalat  al-malama-
tiyya, 86, 246
Siileyman Celeb i (d. 1419): Mevlud-i
§erif, 216-1 7
Sultan Bah u (d. 1691), 169, 385, 386
Sultan Wala d (d. 1312), 311, 313, 314; as
organizer o f the Mevlevis , 315, 324;
Ibtidd^ndme, Rabdbndme,  and
 Intihd?-
ndme, 315 ; Dlwdn, 329
Sumnun ib n Hamza al-Muhib b (d. after
900), 60, 62, 140, 297
Sunbiil Efend i (i7th century) , 46
Surur as-sudur  (Hamiduddi n Nagori) ,
356
Sus, 68
Sutlej River , 346
Swat, 258
Syria, 30, 31, 82, 92, 147, 245, 312, 313,
324, 426;
 Christia n monks in, 10, 86
Tabaqat as-sufiyya  (SulamI) , 85, 90
Tabriz, 280 , 314, 315
Tabriz!. Se e Jalaluddl n Tabriz! ; Magh-
ribl, Muhamma d Tabrlzl ; Shamsuddl n
Tabrlzl
Tadhkirat al-auliyd^  (cAttar), 74 , 303, 304,
3»5
Tafslr. See
 Jacfar as-Sadiq ; SulamI, Abu
cAbdu3r-Rahman as -
Tahir, Sheikh . See Lai Udero
Td^iyya (Ib n al-Farid) , 154, 275-77, 278
Tajik, 371Talbls
 Iblls (Ibn al-jauzl) , 12 n
Tamachi, Ja m (itjth century) , 392
Tamhlddt ( cAynu3l-Qudat), 295 , 296, 351,
370
Tanta,
 249
Taoist, 11 , 285
Tapduq Emr e (late 13th century) , 329, 332
Tarjumdn al-ashwdq  (Ibn cArabI), 264 ,
266, 300
Tartlb as-suluk  (QushayrI) , 173
Tehran, 5 1
Thatta, 185 , 362, 384, 397, 398
"Theology o f Aristotle, " 10
Theresa, St . (d. 1582): Interior Castle, 61
Tholuck, F . A. D. (d. 1877), 9, 64, 166;
Bluthensammlung an d Ssufismus,  9
Thompson, Franci s (d. 1907), 82
Tigris River , 53, 61, 69, 73, 79, 119, 211,
427
Tijaniyya, 403 , 404
Timur (d . 1405), 358
Timurid, 359 , 365
Tirmidhl, Muhamma d ibn CA1I al-Hakl m
at- (d. ca. 932), 55, 56, 57, 187 n, 191, 19
200, 203; Khatm al-wildya,  55, 57, 203
Tlemcen, 247 , 250, 252
Torah, 272 , 361
Transoxania, 30 , 34, 364
Trimingham, J . Spencer , 241
Trumpp, Ernes t (d. 1885), 390, 393
Tuhfat al-ahrdr  (Jam!),
 365
Tunis, 77
Tunisia, 26 4
Turf an, 67
Turkestan, 11,6 7
Turkey, 49 , 99, 128, 168, 185, 202, 205, 206
216, 217, 224, 226, 238, 241, 246, 2
306, 324 , 326, 328, 329, 330, 336, 337,
395, 404, 4°5. 4i8, 425. 432
Turkish, 11 , 13, 26, 33, 46, 69, 74, 75, 137,
148, 159 , 176, 188, 214, 216, 217, 22
225, 231 , 237, 240, 247, 257, 260, 2
279, 280, 292, 309, 312, 325, 328-43, 359
367, 374 , 414, 418, 420, 422, 425, 42
poetry an d literature , 17, 30, 147, 16
162, 163 , 167, 183, 185, 213, 216, 22
241, 248 , 278, 282, 287-317, 323, 32
366, 385 , 394, 406, 412, 413, 419, 4
435; slaves , 101; Chagata y literature ,
366
Turks, 28 , 325, 326, 386
Tus, 84, 91, 92
Tusl. See Sarraj, AbuNas r at-TusI as-
Tustar, 66 , 67
Tustarl. Se e Sahl at-Tustarl , Ibn
cAbdallahT

--- Page 519 ---
496 / INDEX OF NAMES AND PLACES
U
cUbaydullah Ahra r (d. 1490), 365;
Risala-yi wdlidiyya,  359
Ucch, 354
cUdhra, 13 7
cUmar II , ibn cAbduDl-cAzIz (d . 720), 29,
3°
cUmar ib n al-Khatta b (d. 644), 114
cUmar of Omarkot , 392
*Umar Marul,  391
Upanishads, 5 , 64, 322, 361, 362
cUrfi, Muhamma d ash-Shiraz i (d. 1591),
21, 134,22 6
cUryan. Se e Baba Tahir cUryan
Ushturname ( cAttar), 191 , 278, 304-5, 307
Uways al-Qaram , 28, 105, 123, 262
Uzbeg, 224 , 365
Uzbekistan, 32 9
Uzgen, 25 4
Vedas, 39 4
W
Wdciz, al-.  See Yahya ibn Mucadh ar-Raz i
Walad. Se e Baha^uddi n Walad; Sultan
Walad
Wall Deccan i (d. after 1707), 370, 371
Waliullah, Sha h (d. 1762), 3 n, 134, 169,
372, 373. 38». 388; on qayyum,  369;
Sata'-dt, 16 9
Walsh, Joh n R., 332
Waridat. Se e Dard, Khwaja Mir; Suhra-
wardi Maqtul , Shihabuddi n Yahya
Warith Sha h (late i8th century) , 383, 388,
389; Hlr Rdnjha, 383, 388
Warraq, Ab u Bakr al- (loth century) , 108
Wasit, 66
Wasiti, Ab u Bakr Muhamma d al- (d. after
932), 80, 173, 298
Wensinck, Aren d Jan, 10
West-Ostlicher Divan  (Goethe) , 70
Whinfield, E . H., 281, 310Whirling Dervishes , 315. See also
Mevleviyya
Yafici, cAfifuddin c Abdullah al - (d. 1367),
247; Raud  ar-riyahln,  207
Yahya ibn Mucadh ar-Raz i (d. 871-72), 20,
42, 51-52 , 100, 183, 428; prayers of, 128,
156
Yasawiyya, 176 , 364
Yassi (Uzbekistan) , 329
Yazid ibn Mucawiya (d . 683), 50
Yemen, 28 , 67, 105, 262, 355 n
Yeni Yunu s Emre. See Ismail Emre
Yunus Emr e (d. ca. 1321), 33, 46, 106, 159,
168, 234, 279, 329-34, 336, 342,394,395 ;
Dlwdn, 33 0
Yunus Kha n Moghul , 365
Yusuf Hamadha m (d. 1140), 329, 364
Yusuf ibn Husayn ar-Razi (d. 916), 53,
171,298
Yusuf Zulaykha.  See Hamdi, Hamdullah ;
JamI, Maulan a cAbdu3r-Rahman
Zacharias (Zakarya) , 15, 395
Zaehner, Rober t C., 47
Zahiri, az- . See Muhamma d ibn Da3ud
az-Zahirl
Zahirites, 67 , 138
Zakariya. Se e Baha'uddi n Zakariy a
Multani
Zandapll. Se e Ahmad- i Jam, Abu Nasr
Zandapll
Zaynab, Sayyida , 427
Zeb un-Nisa 3 (d. 1689), 327
Zoroastrian: influences , 33, 74-75, 107;
and Sufi saints, 50, 209; angels, 200, 261
Zousfana, 5 1
Zujjaji. Se e Abu cAmr Muhamma d
az-Zujjaji
Zulaykha (Potiphar' s wife), 293, 299, 309,
429. 434Y
V
Z

--- Page 520 ---
INDEX O F SUBJECT S
A (alif), 153, 421, 422; as symbol of God's
unity, 18 , 153, 377, 385, 417-19; con-
nected wit h Ahmad , 369; as the "equa-
tor" of the face, 413. See also M; Sura
2:1, alif-lam-mim,  416
*Abd ("slave, " "servant, " man in general) ,
253. See also Slave of God
Abddl (th e forty, or seven, saints), 200,
202; women , 431, 434
Abdaldn-i Ru m (a group of medieva l
dervishes), 33 5
^Abduhu ("Hi s servant") : Muhamma d the
Prophet called , in Sura 17:1, 220
'•Abid ("worshiper, " lowest degree in the
Bektashi hierarchica l grouping) , 340
Abrar (th e seven "pious") , 200
Abstinence, 31 , 37, 80; fasting and, 115.
See also Wara*-
Active intellect : correspondin g to haqlqa
muhammadiyya, 22 4
Adab (etiquette , correct behavior) , 84,
127, 235, 237, 255; books on, 94; as "ser-
vant of religion, " 230
''Adam ("not-being, " often, the innermos t
abyss of the Godhead) , 322
Advaita ("nonduality " in Hindu philos-
ophy). 5- 38?
Affiliation. Se e Silsila
Affliction, 16 , 90, 124, 126, 131, 136, 167,
380, 395, 421, 428; as sign of divine love,
4, 36, 62, 80, 198, 394; necessar y for
spiritual development , 44, 137; faqr as,
58; leisur e as, 114; patience in, 156; and
pain, 198 , 394. See also Suffering , Trib-
ulation
Ahad ("one, " one of God's names) , 224,
387. 419
Ahadiyya ("oneness, " unicity) , 418
Aham brahmasmi  ("I am Brahman, " uni-
tive expressio n in the Vedic
Upanishads), 6 4
Ahl al-bayt  (Muhammad' s family), 82
Ahl al-ma crifa ("gnostics") , 86
Ahl as-suffa,  ashab as-suffa ("the people
of the Bench, " the pious poor around
Muhammad i n Medina) , 14, 28
Ahwdl. Se e HalAkhi (membe r of a religious sodality in
medieval Turkey) , 246
Akhyar (30 0 "good" in the hierarch y of
saints), 20 0
cAlam al-mithal  (the world of imagina -
tion, of spiritua l values or ideas that
are to be realized in this world), 193,
213,270
Alast ("A m I not your Lord" [Sura 7:171]),
24, 298; connecte d with dhikr, 172
Alast, Da y of. See Covenant , primordia l
Alchemy, 65 ; spiritual , 5, 237; expression s
of, 70; of hunger, 115
Alchemist, 4 2
Alif-i sayqal  (degree of polishin g steel),
4i9
cAlim rabbarii  (divinely inspired master) ,
74
Aim yazisi  ("what is written on the fore-
head" [Turkish] , fate), 414
Allahu Akbar  ("God is most great"), 80,
150, 152. See Takbir
cAma (pur e being), 266
cAmal ("work , action") , 274
Amana ("trust" ) (Sura 33:72), 188
Amir majUs  (high official in Mamlu k
Egypt), 234
Amr (divin e command) , 223
Ana^-l Haqq  ("I am the creative Truth,"
"I am God," Hallaj's claim), 55, 64, 66,
72, 74, 75, 145, 298, 393, 396. See also
Hallaj, Husay n ibn Mansu r al-
Angelology, 260 , 261
Angels, 71 , 116, 140, 153, 169, 189, 193,
196, 200, 256, 261, 262, 268, 318, 321,
377, 412; prostratio n of before Adam,
55, 188; of death, 90, 135, 148, 389; and
green color , 102; fallen, 161, 193, 194;
of resurrection , 200, 224; archangel ,
219, 220, 262; guardian , 262; of inspira-
tion, 265 ; questioning , 331; quality of,
369, 378; recording , 389. See also Ga-
briel; Israfll ; Malakfit;  Sarosh
Annihilation, 17 , 130, 135, 153, 178, 196,
199, 284, 307, 321, 373, 384, 391; fish of,
6, 416; as the object of dhikr, 58, 174;
of the lover, 60, 134; in the Prophet ,
378; in the sheikh , 387. See also Fana
cAnqa. Se e Simurgh
497A

--- Page 521 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS
(reason, intellect) : Junayd as em-
bodiment of , 58; weaknes s of when love
comes, 20 , 130, 140, 219; and struggl e
with nafs,  113; separate s nafs and qalb,
192; loss of, 431
'•Aql-i kull  ("Universa l Reason") , 19
Arabic, 10 , 12 n, 13, 26, 30, 33, 45, 64, 83,
89, 90, 93, 101, 112, 124, 188, 225, 240,
245, 251, 254, 258, 260, 267, 272, 274,
276, 296, 318, 324, 351, 355, 361, 367,
372, 377. 379. 392. 4«i, 4l8> 422, 425.
426, 427, 429; poetry and literature , 34,
71, 162, 264, 275, 292, 310, 353; letters,
153. 161, 396, 411-13, 419, 423, 424;
numbers, 34 4
Arbacln. Se e Forty
fArif ("gnostic") : endowe d with ma crifa,
43, 130; rank in the Bektash i hierarchy ,
340. See also Gnostic
Ascension, Muhammad's , 27, 41, 204; as
symbol, 48 , 219, 303; in Kubra' s system,
255. See also Micraj; Prophet , the
Asceticism, 4 , 24, 43, 66, 67, 75, 100, 141,
168, 190, 242, 322; Indian, 174; eccentric ,
238. See also Zuhd
Ascetic movement , 10, 30, 31, 404, 426
Ascetics, 14 , 16, 36, 38, 45, 47, 53, 54, 56,
61, 109, 111, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120,
122, 127,  156, 190, 228, 243, 247, 248,
342, 347, 380, 415, 428; piety and dis-
cipline of , 15, 27, 40, 152, 234, 399;
Buddhist, 34 ; Christian , 35; and the
Otherworld, 39 , 52, 137, 299; Hindu,
17°> 358 ; mentione d togethe r with
abdal, 202 ; poetry by, 301; women, 427.
See also Zahid
cAshiq ("lover") , 60, 137; as lay membe r
of the Bektashiyya , 340
cAshura (memoria l day of Husayn' s mar-
tyrdom a t Kerbela , 10 Muharra m 680),
34«
Asma al-husnd,  al- ("God's most beautifu l
names"), 177 , 379. See also Divine
names
Asma. lutfiyya  (divine names pertainin g to
God's kindnes s and beauty) , 177
Asma qahriyya  (divine names pertainin g
to God's majesty and wrath) , 177
Atman (th e innermos t self that strives to
become unite d with brahman],  48
Auba (retur n from one's self to God), no
Auliyd Allah.  See Saints; Wall
Autdd (th e four "pillars " of the spiritua l
hierarchy), 200 , 203
Averroist school , 93
Ayin-i cem  (initiatio n ceremon y of the
Bektashis), 34 1cAyn ("eye, " "essence, " the letter cayn),
413, 421; correspond s to cAli, 419
cAyn al-yaqln  (vision, or "essence " of cer-
titude), 142 , 368
'•Ayn-i ;'am c ("perfec t union") , 418
B
B (bd-3), 413, 418, 420; the dot beneath , as
symbol o f CA1T, 420
Bdbd (secon d rank in the Bektash i hier-
archy), 339,34 0
Bakht-i siydh  ("black luck," misfortune) ,
414
BakkcPiin, al - ("those who constantl y
weep"), 3 1
Bald ("affliction") , 136. See also Afflictio n
Bald ("yes") , 24, 136, 184. See also Alast
Balabaylan languag e (an artificia l lan-
guage), 41 1
Bandt an-na^sh  ("daughter s of the bier,"
Ursa maior) , 426
Baqd ("remaining " in God after annihila -
tion, eterna l life), 44, 306; symbols for,
144, 145; as correlativ e of fand, 44, 55,
59, 129, 141, 143, 146, 178, 184, 322;
billdh, 375 , fPr-rasul,  375; in sheikh ,
375. See also Subsistenc e in God; Fand
Baraka ("blessing, " power of sanctity) , 82,
102, 217, 234, 239, 241, 346
Baramdsa ("twelv e months") : Indian
poems about , 434
Basmala (th e formul a "in the name of
God"), 413 , 420, 425
Bast ("expansion, " state of joy and widen-
ing of the heart), 128, 129, 253
Bdtiniyya ("th e people of the inner mean-
ing," gnosti c and Ismaili currents) , 93,
231
Bayca (oat h of allegiance) , 234
Bdz. See Falcon
Bdzgard ("restrainin g one's thoughts " in
the Naqshbandiyya) , 364
Beauty, divine , 6, 24, 39, 163, 174, 177,
256, 280, 294, 300, 309, 323, 411; of the
Otherworld, 38 ; as revealed in created
forms, 289-91 , 292, 313, 336, 429, 430,
432; as reflecte d in the world, 376, 382;
in female beauty , 431. See also Jamdl
Behavior. Se e Adab
Bewilderment, 6 , 100; as last step on the
Path, 123 , 156, 226, 301; and fand, 143;
and black light, 144, 256. See also Haya-
mdn
Birds: at Sumnun' s sermon , 62; as sym-
bols of the soul, 70, 306-8; "gratitude "
as, 126; serve Sufis, 208; "purity " as,
232; green , as divine sign, 236; story of498 /
<Aql

--- Page 522 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 499
the millet-picking , 242; and praise of
God, 302 ; as letter carriers , 424
Bl-sharc ("withou t law," dervishe s who do
not cling to the shan^a),  20, 355
Blame, 42 . See also Malama;  Malamatiyy a
Brahmin, 324 ; as symbol , 286, 291
Breath, 173 , 174, 364, 401; control of, 173,
358, 401; and healing , 208. See also
Habs-i dam
Buddhism, 174 ; Zen, 368
Buddhist, 34 , 37, 142, 345; stories, 11, 207
Buraq (th e steed that carried Muhamma d
during th e ascension) , 140, 220
Buruz (exteriorizatio n of the saint), 205
Call to prayer (adhari),  48, 108, 149, 152;
Muhammad's nam e in, 79, 214; for
healing purposes , 208
Camel: as symbol of the nafs, 113, 391; of
the believer , 308; God seen as, 283, 387
Cardiognosy (thought-reading , firdsa),
i93> 205
Cats: in convents , 209-11; lover compare d
to, 294, 319
Celebi: as title of Maulan a Ruml's succes-
sors, 324 ; as title of Bektash i leaders,
34«
Celibacy, 36 , 111, 252, 340, 428
Certitude, 140 , 142, 168; and connectio n
with faith , 38, 253, 254; as the king who
rules the heart, 60; and connectio n with
tawakkul, 117 . See also cllm al-yaqln;
cAyn al-yaqin;  Haqq al-yaqln
Chess: imager y of, 285
Chilla ("fort y days' seclusion") , 103, 105.
See also Forty
Chillakhdna (solitar y place to perform
seclusion), 10 5
Chilla-yi ma ckusa ("inverte d chilla,"
hanging upsid e down for forty days),
346, 358
Christianity, 26 , 27, 144, 153, 318, 428;
Byzantine, 16 7
Christian, 27 , 32, 64, 81, 86, 93, 98, 118,
126, 182, 204, 230, 239, 271, 305, 312,
318, 395 n, 412, 418, 432; ascetics, mys-
tics, and saints, 5, 34, 35, 36, 116, 170,
207, 302, 429; influences , 10, 72, 340;
mysticism an d theology , 145, 165, 362,
426, 434
Contemplation, 6 , 116, 147, 152, 163, 182,
254; as last stage of dhikr, 172, 376. See
also Murdqaba;  Mushahada
Contentment, 100 , 122, 125, 126, 156. See
also Qana^at;  Ridd
Covenant, primordia l (Sura 7:171) , 24,137, 146, 164, 172, 299; return to, 58,
143, 172; connectio n of, with samcf,
184; and the wine of love, 275, 351. See
also Alast;  Mlthdq
Creatio ex  nihilo, 5
Crow: as symbol of the materia l world,
307, 308
D
D (ddl), 153, 225, 413, 417
Dahriyya ("materialist") , 210
Dakhni Urdu , 296, 351, 370
Damidan ("t o breathe " on a sick person) ,
208
Dance, 179-86 , 239, 240, 277, 309, 384,
397; of the Mevlevis , 234, 315, 325;
RumI on, 315-18, 323, 414; Chishtiyy a
for, 350. See also Samd'
Ddr-e Mansur  ("Mansur' s gallows, " ini-
tiation plac e in the Bektash i convent) ,
74, 340
Dargdh (dervis h convent) , 232, 238, 360,
397
Dede (rank among the Bektashis) , 340
Dervishes ("poor, " faqir), 121-23, 304; wan-
dering, 20 , 106; in general, 119, 144, 145,
175,183, 211 , 230, 236, 237, 244, 313, 338,
346, 359.
 362. 374, 39°, 422; as mouth-
pieces of social criticism , 111, 304; ritual
and musi c of, 171, 329, 330, 343; system
of, 238; communitie s and circles of,
210, 232 , 234, 235, 332, 335, 336, 342,
347, 352. 433! Rifa ci, 176, 209; Aissa-
wiyya, 209 ; Mevlevi , 325, 326; orders
of, 337- 341, 342; Bektashi , 340
Destegiil (jacke t with long sleeves in the
Mevlevi order) , 325
Devriye (Bektash i poems about the ascent
and descen t of man), 281, 341
Dhdt ("Essence") , 272, 431
Dhauq ("tasting, " immediat e experience) ,
193- 253
Dhikr ("recollection, " repetitio n of divine
names or religiou s formulae) , 84, 117,
141, 167-78 , 243, 250, 277, 332, 358, 376,
401, 404; instructio n in, 102; as food
of the heart, 183; healing power of,
208; concentratio n on the sheikh dur-
ing, 237; loud, 248; professio n of faith
as formul a for, 256, 386; all nature in,
331. See also Recollection;  Divine
names
Dhikr al-khafiy  (khafawt),  dhikr akhfa
al-khafl (akhfawl),  174
Dhikr an-nafs  (nafst), 174, 175
Dhikr-i arra  (loud repetition s that sound
like a saw), 176c

--- Page 523 ---
5OO / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Dhikr-i jail,  jahrl, ^alawiya,  lisdni ("with
loud voice") , 171, 366
Dhikr-i khaft,  qalbl ("silent" recollec -
tion), 171 , 366
Dhikr-i qalbl,  dhikr-i ruhl, dhikr as-sirr
(sirri), 17 4
Dhikr sultani,  175
Dhora (India n verse form), 385
Dhu'l-Fiqar ( cAH's two-edge d sword), 246,
419
Dtn-i ildhl  (Akbar's syncretisti c religion),
359
Divine Names , 379, 411; in calligraphy ,
68; in prayer , 161, 162, 188, .355; in
dhikr, 177 , 178, 255, 386; manifestatio n
of God through , 197, 267, 268, 270, 271,
273, 278 , 435; illuminatio n of, 281;
name of God, 283, 284, 378, 389; seal of,
369; lette r mysticis m of, 422, 423. See
also Asma  al-husnd,  al-; Greatest name
of God
Dog, 108 , 109, 125, 141, 208, 229, 231; as
symbol o f nafs, 67, 112, 113, 117, 208;
in a salt mine, 154; of God, 207; and
purification, 208 ; Laila's, 432
Doguj (inspire d poem that is "born" from
a poet [Turkish]) , 337
Donme (Jewis h convert s to Islam), 337
Doomsday. Se e Judgment , Last
Dove (soul-bird) , 308
Dream, 90 , 97, 109, 319, 335; about Mu-
hammad, 14 , 19, 91, 149, 157, 277; of a
saint, 105 ; explanatio n of by spiritua l
guide, 255 ; life as, 322, 382, 383; wom-
en's less true, 429
Drugs, 254 , 336; opium, 335; hashish , 336
Ducd ("fre e prayer") , 155
Du^a maPthur  (traditiona l prayer that is
thought t o bring good results) , 157. See
also Praye r
Duck (symbo l of man between matter and
spirit), 30 8
Ecstasy, 69 , 72, 94, 104,105, 219; as exempt
from ritua l prayer, 152; definition s of,
178, 179; death in, 181; change of senses
in, 277; brought about by looking at
beauty, 291 ; of love, 429; states of, 24,
59, 176, 185, 239, 243, 253, 283, 326, 414;
experiences of , 255. See also \\'ajd
Elephant: a s symbol of God, 3; as symbol
of the homesic k soul, 308, 383
Emerald: an d blindin g of serpents , 11,
113, 256, 309. See also Green color
Er (Turkish , "true man of God"), 426Eren ("ma n of God"), 332, 418
Etiquette. Se e A da b
FZPiq, al- ("The Overpowering, " one of
God's names) , 178
Falcon, baz  (symbol of the soul that re-
turns [baz]  to its Lord), 307; of ecstasy,
4
Fand ("annihilation, " Entwerden) , 47,
142; as correlativ e of baqd, 44, 55, 59,
129, 141, 143, 146, 178, 184, 322; equa-
tion with faqr, 123, 124; symbols of, 144,
145, 256. See also Annihilatio n
Fand fi Allah (annihilatio n in God), 216
Fand ffr-rasul  (annihilatio n in the
Prophet), 216 , 234, 375
Fand fPsh-shaykh  (annihilatio n in the
spiritual guide) , 216, 237, 375
Faqlr ("poor") , 20, 28, 121, 122, 124
Faqlrdnl (feminin e of faqir), 433
Faqr ("poverty") , 120-24. See also
Dervishes; Povert y
Fardgh ("leisure") : as danger, 114
Fasting, 14 , 35, 114-17, 196, 255, 346, 376,
380; patienc e better than, 124; breaking
of, to make a brother happy, 229; in
Ramadan, 106 , 115, 429. See also As-
ceticism; Saum
Fata ("youn g man," the ideal mystic), 246,
426
Fear, 30, 52, 59, 62, 100, 131, 247,391; and
hope, 60, 127, 128, 159, 162, 166, 434; of
God's ruse , 128, 253. See also Hope;
Khauf
Firdsa. Se e Cardiognos y
Fire, 223 ; of love, 6, 41, 79, 134, 135, 284,
286, 291, 294, 313; of Hell, 19; Abra-
ham's, 79 , 119, 395; iron in, 145; of
ecstasy, 179 ; and miracles , 180, 209;
Iblis create d from, 195; mystical , divine,
250, 252, 261, 326; of absence , 314; of
wrath, 321 , 377; of the heart, 424
First Intelligence , 280; Gabriel corre-
sponding to,22 4
Flute: symbo l of the soul, 317, 318, 331,
389
Forty (numbe r of trial), 94, 306, 340, 419;
days, 16, 35, 103, 104, 305, 336, 346, 419;
hadlth, 94 ; saints, 202; and letter m,
224, 419; stages in development , 224,
280, 341, 419; age of, 242; years, 115, 329
Free will. See Predestinatio n
Fu^dd ("heart") , 192
Futuh ("unsolicite d gifts"), 232, 347
Futuwwa ("virtue, " "manliness, " mystico -
social movement) , 240, 245, 246EF

--- Page 524 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 501
Ghaflat ("heedlessness , negligence") , 107,
108, 111. See also Sleep of heedlessnes s
Ghauth ("Help, " highest mystica l leader),
57, 200
Ghazal (Persia n poem, usually on love,
with monorhyme) , 162, 385; Rumi's ,
163, 310; Sanaa's , 301-2
Ghurbat al-gharbiyya,  al- ("Wester n ex-
ile," place of man in this world, in Suh-
rawardi's philosophy) , 262
Ghusl (complet e purification) , 149
Gnosis (wisdo m of the heart), 4, 17, 21, 24,
94, 100, 123, 140, 141 , 204, 262,274; love
superior to , 62; veil of, 81; as superio r
to love, 130. See also clrfdn; Ma crifa
Gnostic ( cari/), 6, 43, 61, 78, 86, 96, 115,
132, 139, 142, 161, 178, 182, 193, 266,
282, 296, 362, 381, 431
Gnosticism, 26 5
Golden Alphabet , 385, 399, 423, 424
Gopis (Krishna' s cowgirls) , 271, 434
Gratitude, 125 , 126, 242, 254; and pa-
tience, 95 , 253; stages of, 162. See also
Patience; Shukr
Greatest Nam e of God (ism-i aczam), 25 ,
44, 177, 256, 377
Green color , 113, 256, 379; of water, 144,
297; of bird, 236; of ocean, 236, 284
Gulbang ( a Turkish prayer in the
Bektashiyya), 34 0
Guru (Hind u spiritua l leader), 387
H
H (ha, last letter of Allah, symbol of hu-
wiyya), 172 , 176, 377, 416, 420, 422; vis-
ion of, 175, 270, 421; as Greates t Name
of God, 256
H, Ha, 225
Habs-i da m (keepin g one's breath in rec-
ollection), 174 . See also Breath; Dhikr
Hdhut (Divin e ipseity) , 270
Ha-mtm (beginnin g of Sura 40-46), 416
Hadath ("create d in time"), 72
Hddt, al- ("The Guiding, " name of God),
177; manifeste d in Muhammad , 273
Hadir ("present") , 181
Hadlth (traditions) , 27, 35, 71, 79, 94, 123,
139, 171 , 190, 222, 288, 318, 353, 363,
429; interpretatio n and commentar y
on, 85, 378; transmitte r of, 221, 344,
427; collectio n of, 221, 251, 351. See also
Muhammad, saying s of; Propheti c say-
ings
Hadlth qudsi  (extra-Korani c revelation) ,
221Hdfiz, al- ("The Preserver, " name of
God), 177
Hdfiz ("wh o knows the Koran by heart") ,
180,434
Haft ca/J/« ("Seve n Chaste Women, "
group of saints), 434
Ha//, 106 . See also Pilgrimag e to Mecca
Hal (pi. ahwal) (mystica l "state") , 38, 53,
84, 109-30 ; definition s of, 99, 100
Halqa ("circle") , 176
Hama iist  ("Everythin g is He"), 147, 274,
283, 362,37 6
Hamdu lilldh,  al- ("Praise be to God"),
332
Haqlqa ("Reality") , 335; as third and last
grade of the Path, 16, 98, 99, 153, 334,
340; mystica l letter-interpretatio n of,
422. See also Sharl ca; Tarlqa
Haqlqa muhammadiyya  ("the Reality of
Muhammad," th e archetypica l Proph-
et), 223, 224, 237, 272, 377, 378
Haqq, al - ("the Reality, " "the Truth, "
one of God's names) , 26, 55, 70, 393
Haqq al-yaqln  ("real certitude, " "reality
of certitude") , 142, 174, 368
Haqqiyya (poin t connecte d with the di-
vine reality) : and correspondenc e to
Muhammad, gree n color, 379
Hayamdn ("bewildermen t and passion") :
connected wit h black, 256
Hayba ("reverence , awe" before God's
majesty), 13 2
Heart (qalb,  dil), 14, 17, 36, 67, 78, 86, 96,
103, 106, 117, 123, 134, 136, 146, 149,
155, 157, 182, 191, 192, 202, 211, 213,
218, 234, 254, 256, 257, 296, 317, 319,
322. 35 1' 366> 37 1* 377. 378. 4°7- 424.
426, 432; wisdom of the, 4; symbols of,
60, 61, 79, 132, 168, 308, 309, 331, 354,
382, 385, 401, 414, 415, 417, 421; God's
presence i n the, 65, 71, 130, 164, 165,
166, 189, 190, 392; in dhikr, 169-75, 3^6;
innermost (lubb,  sirr), 178, 184, 189, 333;
tenderness of , 229; as fine body, 255;
sheikh's, compare d to bezel, 271; lan-
guage of, 279; connecte d with Abraham ,
red color, 379
Heedlessness, 134 , 169, 170, 175. See al:o
Sleep of heedlessnes s
Help, greatest , 73. See also Ghauth
Hi jab al-ma^rifa  ("veil of gnosis") , 81
Hijra (hegira) , 222
Hikmat-i yamanl  ("intuitiv e wisdom") ,
262
Hikmat-i yfindnl  ("Greek philosophy") ,
262G

--- Page 525 ---
5O2 / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Hilya (descriptio n of Muhammad' s
qualities), 21 4
Himma ("hig h ambition, " spiritua l pow-
er of the sheikh) , 79, 257, 270
Hirs ("greed") , 111
Hizb (litany , special prayer formula) , 178
Hizb al-bahr:  by Shadhili , 178, 250
Hope, 40 , 59, 71, 73, 100, 129, 170, 183,
211, 295, 391; preacher of, 51, 52; and
fear, 60, 127, 128, 159, 162, 434
Hit, ("He, " God), 172, 270, 385
Hubb ("love") , 132. See also Love
Hubb ^udhrl  ("platoni c love"), 137, 138
Hudur wa  ghayba (presence near God and
absence fro m oneself) , 129
Hulul ("indwelling") , 73, 144, 290. See
also Incarnatio n
Huma bir d (convey s kingdom) , 292
Hunger, 14 , 15, 35, 58, 115-17, 168, 242.
See also Asceticism ; Fasting; Nafs
Hurr (militan t group in Sind), 396, 397
Hush dar dam ("awarenes s in breath-
ing"), 364
Husn az-zann  ("to think well of God"),
118, 128
Husn u  cishq ("Beaut y and Love") , 291
Huwa ("He") , 420, 422
Huwa huwa  ("exactly he"): God created
Adam as, 72
Huwiyya (divin e ipseity), 377, 420. See
alsoH
Hyacinth (symbo l of the curls), 309, 323;
water, 40 1
clbdddt (work s of worship and obedience) ,
94
Ibn al-waqt  ("son of the moment, " the
Sufi who does not think of past or
future), 13 0
Idol, 291 ; temple, 286
Ihsan ("to do well," to serve God constant -
ly), 29; and connectio n with dark blue,
256
7/mac (consensu s of the communit y in
legal matters) , 32
Ijtihad (explorin g the sources of the law),
32
Ikhlds ("sincerity") , 38, 53, 108; as root of
malamati attitude , 86
Ildhl (Turkis h mystica l song), 330
Ilia. See La
Illumination, 13 , 28, 57, 107, 108, 203,
242, 272 , 430; philosoph y of ishraq,
259-63; o f the actions , names, attri-
butes, and essence, 281c//m (knowledge) : as contraste d to
ma^rifa, 17 , 43, 140
cllm ladunnl  (Sura 18:65) (divinel y in-
spired knowledge) , 18, 193
c//m al-yaqln  ("knowledg e of certitude") ,
141, 142, 368
Iltibds (concealmen t of preeterna l
beauty), 79 , 299
Imam, 93 , 200, 413; the twelve, 234, 338
Imdn ("faith") , 29, 138, 192; and connec -
tion with yellow, 256
Indba (retur n from minor sins to love),
no
Incarnation, 72 . See also Hulul
Independence (no t needing anything ,
istighnd), 12 3
Indo-Persian poetry , 271, 291, 327, 354,
4»3. 435
Initiation, 7 , 9 n, 105, 106, 169, 204, 364,
411; chain of, 28, 57, 95; ceremony , 234;
for Bektashiyya , 340, 341, 432; through
death, 41 1
Insdn-i kdmil.  See Perfect Man
Intellect. Se e cAql
Intimacy, 6 , 43, 57,100, 132; in dhikr, 174,
178. See also Uns
Intiqdl-i nisbat  (transfer of spiritua l
qualities), 23 6
Intoxication, 58 , 59, 68, 129, 152, 206,
254, 283, 304, 373, 393; as station of the
saint, 204 , 366, 369; and kufr-i tartqat,
282, 368; earthly, 288. See also Sobriety;
Sukr
iqdn ("assurance") : and connectio n with
light blue , 256
c/r/an ("gnosis") : and connectio n with
red, 256, 274
Ishdn ("They, " honorifi c title of
Naqshbandi leaders) , 365
Ishdrdt ("mystica l hints, allusions") , 55,
59,80
clshq (passionat e love), 137; as essence of
God, 72. See also Love
clshq-i majdzi  (love of created things) :
leads to love of God, 292
Ishrdq. Se e Illuminatio n
Islam ("complet e surrender") , 29; and
connection wit h white, 256
Ism-i a czam. See Greates t Name of God
Isqdt al-fard^id  (substitutio n of pious
works for ritual duties), 71
Istidldll ("insigh t gained throug h
inference"), 14 7
Istighfdr (formul a to ask God for forgive-
ness), 156 , 243
Ithdr ("to prefer others to oneself") , 99,
229,246I

--- Page 526 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 503
Itminan ("tranquillity") : and connectio n
with green , 256
Ittihad ("union " of lover and beloved) ,
144
J
J (/""). 4*3. 4i8
Jabarut (spher e of divine power), 127,
270
Jabr mahmud  ("higher predestinarian -
ism"), 127 , 197, 198
Jacthba ("attraction " by God), 105
Jadhbl ("reache d throug h jadhba"),  147
Jafr (tellin g the future from the letters of
the Koran) , 412
Jagir (India ) (endowmen t of land), 347
Jaldl ("divin e majesty") , 44; and connec -
tion with black, 256. See also Majesty
Jails Allah  ("who sits with God"), 168
Jam'- ("perfec t collectedness") , 143
Jam'- al-jamt  (last stage of union), 143
Jam'- u tafriqa (collectednes s and separa-
tion), 129
Jamdl ("divin e beauty") , 44, 256; and con-
nection wit h uns, 132. See also Beauty,
divine
Jdmic, al-  ("The Comprising, " name of
God), 378
Jawanmard ("virtuou s young man"), 246,
426
Jihad al-akbar,  al- ("Greates t Holy War"
against th e lower soul), 112
Jinn,42,193, 248 , 256
Judgment, Last , 25, 30, 95, no, 137, 386;
and shapin g of actions, 107; fear of, 127,
196, 331; lovers in a special place after,
140; praye r equated to, 149; criticism
of, 159, 333; Muhammad' s intercessio n
at, 216, 217, 246, 387; angel of, 224;
and book of actions, 414. See also Res-
urrection
K
Kdfi (Sindh i verse form), 385, 390
Kafir ("infidel, " "who denies the sheikh") ,
200
Kajkulah ("wit h his cap awry," charmin g
young man) : as symbol of divine
beauty, 29 0
Kamal ("divin e perfection") , 44
Karabakht ("blac k luck," misfortune) ,
414
Kardmdt (miracle s of saints), 206, 243. See
also Miracle s
Karlm, al - ("The Generous, " name of
God), 243
Karma, 14 2
Kashf ("unveiling, " revelation) , 46, 192Kashf caqlt (revelatio n of the plane of
reason), 19 3
Kashf ilahl  (revelatio n in the heart), 192
Kashf tmdnl  (revelatio n through faith),
193
Kashf kaunl  (revelatio n on the plane of
created things) , 192
Kaygusuz ("san s souci," catchwor d for
hashish), 33 6
Kh: as symbol for ikhlds, 107; as symbol
for khudl  ("selfishness") , 423
Khafi (innermos t secret): and connectio n
with Jesus , luminou s black, 379. See
also Dhikr
Khalifa ("vicegerent") : of God, 188, 223,
377> 378' as successo r in the order, 235,
236, 238; of Shadhili , 251; of Mucmud-
din Chishtl , 346; of Faridudd m Ganj-i
Shakar, 348 ; of Hamadhani , 364
Khalwat da r anjuman  ("solitud e in the
crowd"): i n Naqshband i practice , 243,
364
Khamydza ("yawning, " the insatiabl e
longing o f man for God), 268
Khdnqdh, 210 , 231, 232, 235, 238, 433;
Chishti, 345 , 347, 352, 356
Khardbdt ("taverns") : symbolica l mean-
ing of, 300
Khdriq ul-^dda  ("what breaks the cus-
tom," miracle) , 206. See also Miracles
Khatam al-anbiyd  ("Seal of the proph-
ets"), 221,41 4
Khatam al-auliyd*  ("Seal of the saints") ,
57
Khdtir (pi . khawdtir,  ideas that suddenl y
come into one's heart), 256
Khatm al-wildya  ("Seal of saintship") , 203
Khatt ("line, " script, black down on the
lip). 4i3
Khatt-i istiwd  ("equator " in the face), 413
Khildfatndme (lette r of investitur e for the
successor), 23 6
Khauf, 127 . See also Fear; Raja
Khirqa (patche d frock, sign of the der-
vish), 102 , 103, 234, 325; from Khidr ,
106, 264; as mantle of the Prophet , 222;
bestowed o n Ahmad- i Jam, 244; be-
stowed o n cAbdu3l-Qadir Gilani , 247.
See also Initiatio n
Khirqa-yi irdda  (from the educatin g
master), 10 2
Khirqa-yi tabarruk  ("for the sake of
blessing"), 102 , 235
Kibrit ahmar  ("red sulphur, " symbol of
the alchemisti c activity of the sheikh) ,
236, 237

--- Page 527 ---
504 / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Kiswa (black , gold-embroidere d veil for
the Kaaba) , 276, 277
Ko^an (Ze n term for paradoxica l ques-
tion), 13
Koran, 2.1-26 , 32, 35, 39, 44, 45, 46, 94,
114, Il8, 127, 148, 222, 268, 272, 288,
318, 321 , 327, 331, 333, 374, 379, 387,
391, 394, 412, 420, 428, 430; JBiblico -
Koranic, 5 ; figures of prophet s in, 14,
34, 124, 260, 306, 434; readers of, 20;
Koranic sciences , 25; legal injunction s
of, 31, 106; commentar y on, 41, 56, 57,
71, 83, 86 n, 90, 191, 254, 334, 363, 397;
uncreated, 42 ; recitatio n of, 107, 109,
154, 180, 236, 242, 243, 248, 251, 353;
in prayer , 155, 157; of the rose, 307;
in art, 312, 424-25; in Pahlavi , 372;
face like, 413; heart like, 414
Kufl (connecte d with Kufa: Id-kftfi, "non-
Kufic," no t belongin g to a legal
madhhab, free) , 18
Kufi scrip t (heavy script for Korans and
epigraphy a s used in the first centurie s
of Islam) , 424
Kufr-i tarlqat  ("infidelit y on the Path,"
stage of intoxication) , 282, 368
Kull ("universal") , 19
Kun fa-yak  un ("Be, and it becomes, "
God's creativ e word), 425
L (religiou s meaning) , 418, 420, 421, 422;
as symbo l of Gabriel , 416
La ("no, " beginnin g of the professio n of
faith), 136 , 419
La fata ilia CAH ("ther e is no brave young
man save AH"), 246
Ldhut (divin e nature revealin g itself), 72,
270
La ilaha ilia Allah ("There is no god but
God," firs t part of the professio n of
faith), 23 ; pertainin g to the hat/lya,
99; use of in dhikr, 174, 176; symbol of
divine breathing , 270. See also Profes-
sion of faith; Shahdda
La ilaha illPl-^ishq  ("There is no god but
Love"), 13 7
La-ilia, 168 , 386
Ldm-alif (connecte d letters) , 419. See also
La
Lata^if ("touche s of grace") , 41; subtle
centers in the body, 174, 379
Latlf, al-  ("The Subtle, " name of God),
177
Lauh al-mahfitz,  al-, 414. See also Well-
preserved Table t
Law, religious , 15, 19, 32, 35, 84, 87, 89,93. 95. 96, 98- m. !49. 299, 316, 357,
365, 367, 368, 430; against dancing , 181;
not complyin g with, 21, 61, 359; and
return int o the world, 373. See also
SharFa
Laylat al-qadr  ("Night of Might," when
the Kora n was first revealed , in the last
days of Ramadan) , 193, 430
Light, 4, 6, 38, 56, 60, 96, 115, 140, 155,
174, 223 , 259-63, 268, 280, 293, 321,
322, 354, 401, 421, 430; divine, 56, 80,
116, 130, 138, 142, 144, 155, 190, 198,
205, 215 , 223, 252, 277, 300, 376, 382,
387, 391, 429; of Muhammad , 56, 70, 83,
214, 215, 216, 217, 223, 224, 226, 227,
420; of the believer , 80, 215; black, 124,
144, 256, 280, 379; colored, 255, 256. See
also Muhammad , the Prophet ; Illumi-
nation
Lily (symbo l of the silent worshiper) ,
172,308
I.isan ul-hdl  (state of speakin g by one's
being), 45 , 306
Logos, 22 3
Longing, |8 , 90, 100, 133, 162, 164, 174,
178, 360, 38), 391, 424; love and, 38, 95,
137, 161, 242, 297, 314, 329; palace of,
49; sword of, 136; in cAttar's work , 305,
306; in Iqbal's work, 307; flute as sym-
bol of, 318, 331; for pain, 385; woman
as symbo l of, 389, 429, 434. See also
Love; Shauq
Love, 6, 8, 16, 24, 33, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45,
5». 57. 59- 64. 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 76, 78,
80, 83, 87, 90, 95, 100, 107, 110, 123,
127, 130-41 . 148, 149. 152, 155, 160,
161, 163, 166, 182, 18), 186, 192. 195,
196, 199, 203, 204, 216, 218, 231, 240,
242, 2r,<>, 2(>0. 266, 2-2, 275, 279, 287,
289-300, 303, 305, 309, 314, 316, 319,
32I- 329 ' 3-12. 3-1'). 35". 353- 354. 36",
368, 378, 381. 385, 388, 391, 392, 393,
405, 407, 420, 123, 426, 427, 429, 430,
432, 434, 435; divine essence as, 4, 45.
72, 284; mutual , 25, 40, 53, 165; wine of,
35; God's preceding , 36, 39, 49, 52, 75,
82, 87, 122, 138, 165, 215, 392; of the
Prophet, 30 , 39, 70, 214, 216, 226, 240,
387; lover , love, and belove d one, 49,
285, 418 ; transformatio n in, 58; fra-
ternal, 60 , 228, 230;' as superio r to
gnosis, 62 ; platonic , 68, 137; sufferin g
in, 72, 198, 333, 394, 395; preetcrnal ,
79; ridd a result of, 126; and dhikr, 168,
171, 174; breeze of, 168, 323, 331 ; house
of, 183; as arndna,  188; as ascension .
219; poem s of, 244, 253, 276; ocean of,L

--- Page 528 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 505
286; sensual , 288, 335, 352, 384; of Mau-
lana Rumi , 326; of the Prophet' s fam-
ily, 375; of the sheikh , 387; of Hallaj,
396; of women , 431. See also Fire, of
love
Lower sel f (base faculties) , 54, 103, 212,
237, 242, 256, 366, 377, 378, 392; Yazld
as symbo l of, 50; educatio n and puri-
fication of , 61, 192, 234; dog as symbol
of, 67, 117, 208, 308; shay tan, 141, 193,
222; symbol s of, 112-14; goose as symbol
of, 336; camel as symbol of, 391; woman
as symbo l of, 428, 429, 434. See also
Nafs
Lubb ("innermos t heart"), 192
Lutf (divin e kindness) , 421
M
M (mini),  153, 422; as symbol of mu-
ruwwa, 108 ; as letter of creaturelines s
and trial , 224, 225; as letter of Mu-
hammad, 369 , 416, 419; as symbol of
the mouth , 413; and number forty, 419.
See also Alif; Ahmad
Mim duasi  (Bektash i prayer connecte d
with Muhammad' s name), 420
Madhhab ("lega l school," way), 17
Mahabba ("love") , 130, 131, 132, 137. See
also Love
Mahdt ("wh o is guided" and appear s at
the end of time to fill the world with
justice), 20 0
Majdhub ("attracted, " mystic who has
been enraptured) , 19, 105
Majesty, 6 , 44, 149, 163, 197, 294, 323, 435;
revealed i n thunder , 61; symbolize d by
la-sin, 69 ; symbolize d by zulf, 300; in
dhikr, 174 , 177. See also Beauty; Jaldl
Makr ("God' s ruse"), 128, 160, 198, 253;
and Iblls, 194
Maktub ("written, " fate), 414
Malakut (angeli c world), 270
Malama ("blame") , 86, 87. See also Blame;
Malamatiyya
Mdlang (dervis h at the sanctuar y in
Sehwan), 35 5
Malfiizdt (saying s of the Sufi masters) , 356
Manichaeism, 3 4
Manichaean, 32 , 138; manuscripts , 67, 423
Maqdm ("station " on the mystica l path),
98,99, 100 ; definition s of, 109-30; as me-
morial place , 239
Marbub ("wh o has a lord," named thing
ruled by the Name in Ibn cArabi's
system), 27 0
Mard ("man") , 426
Ma^rifa ("gnosis") , 6, 43, 130, 192; as laststation instea d of haqiqa,  99; in Bek-
tashi thought , 340
Marifati (mystica l folk song in Bengal) ,
401
Martyr, 76 , 336, 387; of longing , 90; of
Kerbela, 340 ; the fourtee n Shia, 413;
of love, 11, 65, 75, 136, 138, 303, 320,
327, 395. See also Hallaj, Husayn ibn
Mansur al -
Materialists, 20 8
Mathnawl (Persia n poem in rhymin g
couplets, mainl y for didactic , romantic ,
and heroi c themes) , 301; by Sana DI, 302,
303; by cAttar, 303-7 ; by Iqbal, 327; by
Bedil, 371 . See also Rumi, Maulan a
Jalaluddin
Maulid (celebratio n of a saint's or the
Prophet's birthday) , 216, 240, 401. See
also Siileyma n Celebi
Mawadda ("love, " "charity") , 132
Mela chirdghdn  (festival in Lahore) , 384
Microcosm, microcosmic , 187, 189, 224,
255- 376, 435
Mihrab ("praye r niche"), 293
Minnat ("gratitude " as a burden and
obligation), 12 1
Miracles, 11 , 17, 177, 180, 199, 204-13,
243. 339- 405. 434: of Gllani, 18; ques-
tionable, 19 , 20, 238, 248; conversio n by,
38; of Dhu'n-Nun , 42; of Nuri, 61; of
Hallaj, 67 ; as ruse, 128; of the Prophet ,
214, 387; the Hikam as, 251; of cAynu3l-
Qudat, 296 ; of the yogis, 357, 358. See
also Kardmdt;  Mucjizat
Mi^rdj ("Ascension") , 48, 94, 219, 226;
prayer as , 148; Muhammad's , 218, 220.
See also Ascensio n
Mirror, 49' , 289, 421; sheikh as, 50, 237;
death as, 107; of the heart, 171, 228;
man as, 187, 190, 271, 295, 394; of both
worlds, 188 ; God as, 270; Muhamma d
as, 272; creation as, 268, 376, 382 ; lover
and belove d as, 295; face as, 377
Mi thai ("image, symbol") , 291
Mlthdq ("covenant") , 24. See also Alast;
Covenant, primordia l
Molla Hunka r (head of the Mevlevis) ,
324
Monism, 5 , 47, 64, 267, 263, 273; existen-
tial, 267
Moth and candle, 62, 70, 142, 145
Mudill, al-  ("Who leads astray," name of
God): manifeste d in Satan , 273
Aiufarrih (tranquilizer) , 126
Muhammadan path . See Tarlqa-yi
muhamrnadiyya

--- Page 529 ---
506 / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Muhammad rasul  Allah ("Muhamma d is
God's messenger, " second part of the
shahada): pertainin g to the sharl ca, 99,
174
Muharram, 75 , 340, 341, 387
Muhasaba ("analysi s of the soul"), 54
Muhibb ("lover") , 137; as highest rank or
initiated membe r among the Bektashi ,
340
Muhlt, al-  ("The All-Encompassing, "
name of God manifeste d in His
throne), 27 0
Muhyl, al - ("He who bestows life," name
of God), 44
Mucjizat (miracl e of a prophet) , 206
Mukhaddardt-i abddliyya  (a group of
women saint s in Sind), 434
Mukhlas ("wh o has been made sincere") ,
87
Mukhlis ("wh o practice s sincerity") , 87
Mulk lak,  al- ("Thine is the kingdom, "
dhikr of the stork), 308
Mv?min ("wh o has Imdn," faithful , be-
liever), 29
Mumit, al - ("He who kills," name of
God), 44
Munajat ("intimat e conversation, "
prayer, orison) , 155
Munaqara (contes t of saints), 79, 211
Muqtasid ("moderate , who loves God for
Himself"): an d connectio n with qalb,
!9>
Murdqaba ("contemplation") , 141
Murld ("disciple , novice") , 100-104 , 106,
108; fake , 117; heart as, 122; unity of
with sheikh , 206, 237
Muridun (mystica l movemen t in Algarve
in the 12th century) , 264
Murshid ("spiritua l guide"), 433
Muruwwat ("virtue") , 108, 339
Musammat (Persian-Turkis h poetica l
form), 33 0
Mushahada ("contemplation , vision") ,
141, 172
Mushdfira (meetin g of poets, particularl y
in Indo-Pakistan) , 374
Music, 179-86 , 236, 239, 240, 241, 353, 371,
384, 385, 389, 390, 401; in Rumi's work,
317, 318, 324, 325; Chishtiyy a in favor
of, 348, 350; Naqshbandiyy a against ,
365, 366; Dard's love of, 373, 374, 380,
381, 403. See also Dance; Sama c
Mustajdb ad-du^d  ("whose prayers are
answered"), 160 , 205
Mustawif (pretende r to Sufism) , 20
MutcF ("h e who is obeyed, " possibly Mu-
hammad), 223 , 224Mutasabbir ("wh o attempt s to be
patient"), 12 4
Mutasawwif ("wh o aspires to become a
Sufi"), 20
Muwahhid ("confesso r of unity," mono-
theist), 69 , 146, 147
Myein (Greek , "to close the eyes"), 3
Mysterium fascinans,  44
Mysterium tremendum,  44
Mystical concert , 20. See also Dance;
Music; Sama c
Mystical leader , 335; suhbat with, 366;
letters by , 367. See also Sheikh
N
N (nun), 416, 418, 421, 422
Nafas ("breath") , 268
Nafas ar-rahmdn  ("the breath of the Mer-
ciful," comin g from Yemen) , 28, 29, 262,
268, 369
Nafs ("lowe r soul"), 112-14, 116, 190, 191,
192, 253; and connectio n with Noah,
blue, 373 . See also Lower self
Nafs al-ammdra,  an- ("the soul that in-
spires evil") , 25, 50, 112, 127, 291
Nafs al-lawwdma,  an- ("the blamin g
soul," conscience) , 86, 112
Nafs al-mutma?inna,  an- ("the soul at
peace"), 25 , 112, 291
Nafs al-qaddlsa,  an- ("the sanctifie d
soul"), 17 5
Namdz ("ritua l prayer") , 148; interpreta -
tion of letters of, 422. See also Prayer,
ritual; Saldt
Namu Amida  Butsu, 174
Narcissus: o f union, 49; as symbol of the
eye, 308, 382
Nard (game) , 285
Nastb ("part") : Bektash i term, 340
Ndsut ("huma n nature in God"), 72, 270
Nact (poe m in honor of Muhammad) ,
226, 325
Ndz ("coquetry, " quality of the beloved) ,
291
Nazar ("looking") , 290
Nazar ild^l-ahddth  ("contemplatio n of
beautiful youn g men, of the unbeard -
ed"), 290,31 3
Nazar ba r qadam ("watchin g over one's
steps"): in Naqshband i discipline , 364
Neoplatonism, 10 , 43, 96, 265, 280, 318,
321
Neti neti  ("No, no," negativ e descriptio n
of the divine in the Upanishads) , 322
Nigdh ddsht  ("to watch one's thoughts") :
in Naqshband i discipline , 364
Nightingale, 287 , 360; in cage, 158; of the

--- Page 530 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 507
tongue, 169 ; as symbol of Muhammad ,
217, 222, 374; as symbol of Gabriel, 220;
as symbo l of the soul, 298, 299, 307, 322.
See also Rose
"Night of Might." See Laylat al-qadr
Night vigil s and prayers (tahajjud),  27,
40, 114, 115, 148, 155, 196, 243, 254. See
also Asceticism ; Prayer
Nirvana, 14 2
Niya ("intention " at the beginnin g of
religious acts) , 149
Niydz ("complaining") , 291
Nubuwwa ("prophethood") , 421
Nuqaba? (thre e "substitutes " in the
hierarchy o f saints), 200
Nur muhammadl  ("Muhammad' s pre-
existent light") , 224. See also Light, of
Muhammad
O
Obedience, 58 , 100, 134, 135, 148, 154,
190, 199, 207, 253, 291, 392; love as, 53,
71, 131; to sheikh, 103; works of, 114,
211; angel s in constant , 188; Satan's ,
194
Ocean, sea , 51, 131, 236, 237, 284, 303, 306,
346, 394; of God, 5, 146, 308; of the
soul, 12, 178, 190, 306; of bewildermen t
or love, 143, 293, 416; of blood, 320
Oratio infusa,  164, 166
Panentheism, 26 7
Pantheism, 5 , 6, 64, 147, 214, 263, 267,
282, 316, 328, 398, 406
Pantheistic, 43 , 64, 72, 76, 266, 267, 279,
376
Paradoxes, 13 , 71, 336; Bayezld's , 47-50;
Shibli's, 78 , 79, 80, 83; Niffari's , 81; in-
terpretation of , 297. See also Shatfy
Parrot, 158 , 217; as symbol of the disciple ,
237
Pashto, 30 , 33, 74, 371, 383,398-401 , 423
Patched frock , 20, 21. See also Khirqa
Path, the (only in the technica l sense), 4,
45> 83, 98-108, 167, 181, 190, 200, 203,
204,212, 235,241,252,257,267 , 306,381;
beginning of , 16, 94, 229; stations and
stages of, 12, 41, 58, 84, 95, 109-30, 256;
outside o f (uwaysT),  28; Shadhiliyya ,
253; hegir a as model of, 222; tenfold,
255; master s of, 297; Naqshbandi , 366;
women on , 430, 432, 434, 435. See also
Tarlqa
Patience, 124-26 , 308, 309, 380, 428; and
gratitude, 95 , 253; as better than prayer,156; love burns, 294. See also Gratitude ;
Sabr
Pearl (raindro p in the ocean), 284, 303,
392
Pen: dried-up , 197; correspondin g to Mu-
hammad an d the First Intelligence , 224;
heavenly, 413 , 414; normal, 415-17. See
also Qalam
Perfect Ma n (Insan-i  katnit), 27, 187, 196,
273, 282, 306, 341; sheikh as, 200, 237;
Muhammad as , 272, 387; Schaede r on,
274; Jill on, 280-81
Perfections: of . prophethood , 366, 369,
373; of sainthood , 366
Perinde a c cadaver,  53, 103
Persian poetry , literature , 8, 17, 20, 30, 49,
51, 61, 70, 73, 76, 78, 87, 102, 104, 106,
no, 111, 112, 121, 122, 133, 137, 138,
139, 147, 160, 162, 167, 172, 191, 222,
226, 244, 251, 271, 278, 280, 282, 287-
328, 348, 353, 354, 355, 360, 362, 363,
366, 37L 373. 376, 381, 383. 384, 388,
393- 397. 398, 399. 4°6, 4<>7. 412, 419-35
passim
Physician: imag e of the sheikh as, 104,
IS6- !75. 3i7
Pilgrimage: t o Mecca, 32, 66, 67, 71, 89,
106, 229, 230, 264, 388, 425, 430; to Data
Ganj Bakhsh , 88; rewards of making
seventy, 231 ; Abu Sacid without , 242;
spiritual, 27 6
Pir, 22; Bektashi , 341. See also Sheikh
Pirism, 22 , 236, 405, 406
Pir Pagar o (mystica l leader in Sind), 396
Pole, 21. See also Qutb
Post (sittin g place for the sheikh) , 236
Postnishln (successor) , 236
Poverty, 28 , 35, 37, 58, 60, 95, 100, 111,
120-24, 126 , 238, 242, 322, 429; as qual-
ity of Muhammad , 222, 315; cAttar on,
304. See also Faqr
Prayer, 14 , 35, 40, 53, 67, 68, 71, 80, 88,
94, 108, 114, 126, 128, 155-67, 180, 196,
199, 209, 236, 251, 253, 254, 255, 270,
347. 34 g. 353. 420, 424, 430, 432; ritual,
»7. 32. 37. 48> 80, 94, 106, 124, 148-55,
163, 167, 177, 178, 180, 192, 243, 251,
272, 325. 33L 346> 429. 43<>. 43L 432;
direction of , 21; Divine Names in, 25,
188; Prophe t stresses importanc e of, 27;
literary, 33 , 45, 46, 52, 84, 260, 301, 376;
Jesus-prayer, 173 ; compare d with sama^,
185; for healing purposes , 208; equal to
micrdj, 218 ; sheikh as leader of, 232;
formulae, 238 , 242, 250, 340; Rumi on,
324, 325. See also Dwca; Namdz;  Salatp

--- Page 531 ---
508 / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Predestination, 32 , 118, 156, 278, 324; and
free will, 6, 24, 141, 188, 196-98
Profession o f faith, 99, 175, 214, 419; and
divine breathing , 270; in dhikr, 168,
331, 386. See Shahdda;  La-ilia
Proximity, 41 , 57, 141, 146, 192, 204, 243,
306, 373; in prayer, 148, 153; in dhikr,
173; to the perfection s of prophethood ,
!93' 375> 377! qaba qausayn,  221. See
also Qurb
Puppet play , 382; player in, 191, 278, 279,
305. See also Shadow play
, 421,422
Qaba qausayn  ("two bows' length" )
(Sura 53:9) , 221
Qabd ("compression") , 100, 128; prefer-
able to bast, 129, 253
Qadar ("predestination") , 196
Qaf-i qurb  ("the limit of proximity") , 421
Qahr (divin e wrath), 421
Qa^im al-layl  wa sa^im ad-dahr  ("who
stays awak e during the night and fasts
constantly"), 114 . See also Ascetics
Qalabiyya ("outwar d form"): and connec-
tion with Adam and black, 379
Qalam ("pen") , 197; in Sura 68:1, 416. See
also Pen
Qalandar (dervis h who does not care for
outward forms) , 87, 88
Qalb ("heart") , 191, 192. See also Heart
QancFat ("contentment") , 421
Qaslda (i n Arabic , Persian , etc., long
monorhymed poem , generall y panegy -
ric), 162, 163, 226; of KhaqanI , 16; the
TaPiyya, 277 ; of Sana DI, 301, 302; of
cUrfi, 352
Qayyum (th e highest spiritua l guide in
later India n Naqshband i theories) , 203,
369- 37°. 374
Qibla (praye r direction) , 195, 299
Qidam (God' s preeternity) , 72
Qillat al-kalam  ("little speech") , 114, 334
Qillat al-manam  ("little sleep"), 114
Qillat at-ta cdm ("littl e food"), 114, 115
Qiydma. Se e Judgment , Last; Resurrec -
tion
Qubba (smal l sanctuary) , 407
Quetat ("littl e torn cats," the novices in
the Heddaw a order), 210
Qul ("Say! " divine address to the
Prophet), 1 9
Qurb ("proximity") , 132, 133, 252
Qurb al-far&id  (proximit y brought by the
prescribed religiou s duties, connecte d
with prophethood) , 133Qurb an-nawafil  (proximit y brough t by
supererogative works , connecte d with
sainthood), 13 3
Qutb ("pole , axis," highest member in the
hierarchy o f the saints), 57, 200, 202,
203, 369; in a Sufi circle, 176; always
from the Shadhiliyya , 250; Hasan ibn
CA1I the first, 374
R
R (ra3), 418, 422
Rabb ("Lord, " in Ibn cArabi's syste m the
divine nam e that "rules" a created
thing [marbub]),  270, 273
Rabb an-nau c al-insanl  (Gabriel in Suh-
rawardi Maqtul' s system), 261
Rabita kurmak  ("establis h a tie" between
master an d disciple) , 237
Radii (repeate d word or phrase in a
poem), 16 2
Rahim, ar - ("The Merciful, " name of
God), 177
Rahman, ar - ("The Compassionate, "
name of God), 161, 177; manifeste d in
Muhammad, 225 ; mystical letter value
of, 422
Rahmat ("mercy") : manifeste d in rain
and in the Prophet , 137, 273
Rain, 61, 78, 139; dance to produce , 179;
falls thank s to the activity of the saints,
203; and Muhammad , 217, 387; and
divine mercy , 309, 321; drop of be-
comes pearl , 392
Raja ("hope") , 127. See also Hope
Rak^a (uni t of movement s and formula e
in the ritual prayer), 149, 152, 155
Ramadan, 193 , 208, 430
Rapture, 26 , 152, 239, 275, 316, 407, 431,
432
Rdziq, ar - ("The Nourisher, " name of
God): manifeste d in the vegetabl e
world, 27 0
Razzdq, ar - ("He who bestows rizq," name
of God), 118
Reason. Se e '•Aql
Recollection, 28 , 35, 53, 58, 78, 164, 167-
78, 255, 277, 334, 382, 386, 418; of flow-
ers, 46; Niffarl on, 81; as food of the
gnostics, 115 ; connecte d with love, 132,
134, 135, 276. See also Dhikr
Rending o f garments , 181
Renunciation, 31 , 37, 48, 58, 80, 95, 111,
112, 170, 334; culminate s in tawakkul,
117; book on, 156. See also Asceticism ;
Zuhd
Repentance, 24 , 100, 112, 160, 244, 301;Q (qSf),Q

--- Page 532 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS / 509
problem o f obligatorines s of, 56, no;
cleans the book of actions, 415. See also
Tauba
Respect, reverence , 6, 100. See also Hayba
Resurrection, 399 ; Koran as, 25; love
greater than , 134; spiritual , 135, 322;
ritual praye r as, 150, 152; angel of, 200;
spring as , 323. See also Judgment ;
Qiyama
Ribat (convent) , 231
Rida ("contentment") , 53, 125-27. See also
Contentment
Riya ("hypocrisy") , 54, 108
Rizq ("dail y bread") , 118
Rosary, 114 , 154, 169, 172, 177; exchang e
of, for the infidels ' girdle, 305, 432. See
also Tasblh
Rose, 126 , 161, 186, 222, 287, 323, 332,
360, 376 , 380, 394, 423; thrown by
Shibli, 68 , 69, 338; Hallaj compare d to,
75; dies smiling , 136; of wish, 161; as
manifestation o f God, 217, 222, 298,
299; Muhamma d as, 220; between lover
and beloved , 295; in collectedness , 382;
symbol o f pain and happiness , 383. See
also Nightingal e
Rose garden , 166, 380; khanqah  as, 232;
of Abraham , 119
Rubd'-t (quatrain) , 244, 362
Rububiyya ("divin e lordship") , 25; sirr
ar- (secre t of), 56
Ruby: as symbol of the purified heart,
265, 309
Ruh (spirit) : human, 191; divine, 223
Ruhl (spiritua l principle) : connecte d
with David , yellow, 379
Rukh ("cheek") : symbolica l meanin g of,
300
Rukhsa (pi . rukhas,  "indulgence") , 235
Ruku'- (genuflectio n in ritual prayer) ,
153. J54
Ruse of God. See Makr
S (sin), 420, 423
Sdbik, as - ("the preceding, " who has an-
nihilated hi s will in God's will), 191
Sabir ("patient") , 124
Safer ("patience") , 124. See also
Gratitude; Patienc e
Sabiir ("perfectl y patient") , 124
Sabur, as - ("The Patient, " name of God),
177
Sabzpush ("wearin g green, " the highes t
saints, prophets , and angels) , 102
Sach ("Truth " in Sindhi) : as translatio n
of haqq, 393Sad (lette r symbolizin g the eye), 413, 423
Sadr ("breast") : connecte d with isldm, 192
Safd ("Purity") , 14, 16, 102, 232
Safar dar watan ("interna l journey " in
Naqshbandi theories) , 364
Saff ("rank") , 14
Sdfl ("pure") , 16, 130, 423
Sahw ("sobriety") , 58, 129. See also
Intoxication; Sobriet y
Saints, n , 21, 72, 73, 86, 182, 199-213 ,
232, 239, 241, 243, 246, 247, 268, 270,
273,290,296,308, 353 , 357, 389, 405,407 ,
427, 428; female, 8, 36, 38, 40, 264, 358,
426, 430, 431, 433; questionable , 20,
159, 238; worship of, 22, 205, 355 n,
398, 405, 433; Chishtl, 36, 345, 347, 348,
351, 352, 360; pillar of light formed
from soul s of, 56; connecte d with nawd-
fil, 133; birthda y celebratio n of, 240;
Indo-Muslim, 242 , 355; Gilani as proto-
type of, 248; North African , 358; pa-
tron, 364; and intoxication , 369; Sindhi,
384, 396
Saintship, sanctity , 83, 199-213 , 255; hier-
archical, 41 , 57; books on, 55-57
Sajjdda ("praye r rug"), 236
Sajjdda-nishin ("successor") , 236
Sakina ("divin e presence") , 209
Saldt, 148-55 . See also Prayer, ritual
Saldt maqluba  (performin g the prayer
hanging upsid e down), 241
Sdlik ("wayfarer " on the Path), 98, 105,
423
Salt mine : as symbol of annihilation , 145
Samdc ("mystica l concert and dance") ,
178-86, 243 , 350, 384; Abu Sacld on, 244;
Ahmad Ghazzal i on, 295; Mevlevi , 325;
Naqshbandiyya against , 365; Dard on,
380, 381. See also Dance; Music
Samadiyyat ("stat e of eternity") , 116
Samd'-khdna (roo m for samd°), 181
Sarniwisht ("wha t is written on the
head," fate) , 414
Saum. Se e Fasting
Saum dd^udi  (fasting one day, eating one
day), 115
Satori, 36 8
Sayyid (descendan t of Muhamma d
through C A1I and Fatima) , 82, 223
Shadow play , 277, 278. See also Puppet
play
Shahdda ("professio n of faith"), 256; use
of in dhikr, 170, 176. See also Profes-
sion of faith; La-ilia
Shahld ("martyr") , 76. See also Martyr
Shdhid ("witness") , 76; beloved as, 291s

--- Page 533 ---
51O / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Stidhid al-ghayb  ("Doppelganger " in
Kubra's theories) , 256
Shakti mysticism , 434
SharPa (religiou s law), 106, 203; as first
of the three grades in the Path, 16, 98,
99, 152, 340; compare d to prune, 334;
as divine secret, 358. See also Haqlqa;
Law; Tariq a
Shashdar (hopeles s situatio n in nard), 285
Shath, shathiyat,  41, 49, 145. See also
Paradoxes; Theopathi c locution s
Shauq, 132 . See also Longing
Shaykha (femal e spiritua l leader), 432
Shaykh ash-shuyukh  (head of the Sufis in
medieval Baghdad) , 245
Shay tan (symbo l of the nafs), 113, 141, 222
Sheikh (spiritua l guide), 101-3, 125> 16i>
210, 230, 231, 232,234-36 , 241,247 , 255,
264, 283, 290, 330, 332, 386, 397, 428,
432; miracle s performe d by, 17, 205;
veneration of , 22, 193; illuminatio n at-
tained without , 28-29; of the Khalva -
tiyya, 46; himma of, 79; like emerald ,
113, 309; faqr as, 122; and tawajjuh,
170, 175; and insight into the heart,
178, 335; as qutb, 200; and unity with
disciple, 206 ; questionable , 212, 238,
405; of the Rifa cis, 248; heart of, 271; as
symbol o f the establishment , 286; like
Solomon, 306 ; of the Mevlevis , 325, 326;
of the Chishti , 347; suhbat with, 366;
letters of, 367; as father figure, 375, 376
Sheikh at-tarbiya,  101
Shikast, 191 , 371
Shirk ("associatin g somethin g with God"),
6, 32
Shirk khaft  ("hidden associationism") , 119
Shuhud ("vision , contemplation") , 267
Shukr ("gratitude") , 125, 126, 253
Sidrat al-muntaha,  al- ("the ultimat e
lotus tree, " place of the Prophet) , 219
Sikke (Mevlev i cap), 325
Silsila ("spiritua l chain"), 27, 88, 169, 234,
297- 3!3. 339. 351- 356, 364. 3?2
Simurgh (mythica l bird), 194, 260, 421
Si murgh  (30 birds, identica l with
Simurgh), 30 7
Sincerity, 38 , 93, 119, 197, 204. See also
Ikhlas
Sindhi, 18 , 33, 74, 75, 76, 108, 207, 226,
240, 248, 305, 326, 371, 383-98, 401, 418,
423, 433, 434. See also Siraiki
Siraiki, 75 , 393
Sirdt al-mustaqlm,  as- ("the right path"),
423
Sirr (innermos t part of the heart), 192;
connected wit h Moses, white, 379Slave of God, 5, 52, 187, 282; lunatic as
freed, 19;  remains slave, the Lord, Lord,
191, 270. See also cAbd
Sleep of heedlessness , 29, 107, 108, 342,
391. See also Ghaflat
Sleeplessness: a s ascetic means, 114, 115
Sobriety, 58 , 206, 277, 283; and intoxica -
tion, 58, 129, 368, 373; of Junayd , 83;
of the Shadhiliyya , 251; as station of
the prophets , 204, 369, 373. See also
Sahw
Sophos ("wise") , 14
Spiritual chain . See Silsila
Stirb und  werde ("die and become") , 70,
323
Stork (laklak):  as pious bird, 308, 425
Strife wit h God, 159
Subha. Se e Tasbih
Subhdni ("Glor y be to me," Bayezld' s
shath), 49 , 145
Subsistence i n God, 6, 7, 44, 143, 373. See
also Baqa
Suf ("wool") , 14, 102
Suffering, 100 , 196, 295, 305, 307, 388, 407,
434, 435; love rejoices in, 60, 64, 75; in
Hallaj's thought , 65, 74, 396; as equiva-
lent to God, 72, 136; maturatio n
through, 137 ; for love, 159, 333, 394,
395; vicarious , 206. See also Affliction ;
Love
Suhbat (spiritua l conversatio n betwee n
master an d disciple) , 102, 366
Sukr ("intoxication") , 59, 68, 129; con-
nected wit h Bayezid , 58. See also In-
toxication; Sobriet y
Suluk ("wanderin g on the Path"), 98
Sun at midnight , 115, 129, 200, 407
Sunna (tradition , customs of the Prophet) ,
32, 56, 106, 348
Sur (chapte r in Sindhi poetry), 390, 391
Swahili, 22 5
Ta, 416, 422
Td-hd (Sur a 20:1), 417
Tab* ("nature") , 191
Tahdra ("ritua l purity") , 37, 148, 149,
243. 255. 4i6
Td^ifa (suborder , fraction of an order),
241
Tdj ("crown") , dervish cap, 234
Tajalll ("manifestation , illumination") ,
268, 281, 298
Takblr (th e call Alldhu Akbar), 150
Tdlib ad-dunyd,  -al-dkhira,  -al-mauld
("who seek s the world, the Otherworld ,T(*a),422T

--- Page 534 ---
INDEX O F SUBJECT S / 5!!
the Lord, " definitio n of the three classes
of people) , 212, 428
Talqln (recitatio n of the shahada  in a
dying person' s ear), 175
Talqln adh-dhikr  (teachin g the dhikr),
169
Tao, 285
Tapas (asceti c heat), 170
Tarlqa ("Path, " order, fraternity ; second
stage in the threefol d Path), 16, 98, 99,
153. 2°3, 334- 34o; order, 239-41; Shadh-
iliyya, 250 ; Bektashiyya , 339; Qadir-
iyya, 384; letter speculation s about, 422.
See also Haqlqa;  Path; SharFa
Tarlqa-yi khwajagan:  the Naqshbandiyy a
order, 364
Tarlqa-yi muhammadiyya  ("the Muham -
madan Path, " founde d by Nasir Mu-
hammad c Andalib i n Delhi), 227, 373,
374, 380, 403, 404
Turk at-tark  ("quit quitting, " complet e
surrender), 12 2
Tasarruf (powe r of the sheikh to bring
about events) , 257
Tasawwuf (Islami c mysticism) , 14, 16
Tasblh ("rosary") , 169. See also Rosary
Tasln (mysteriou s letter at the beginnin g
of Sura 27), 69, 416
Tat twam  asi (identity formul a of the
Upanishads), 4 8
Tauba, 109-10 . See also Repentanc e
Tauhld ("t o declare that God is One"), 6,
17, 23, 69, 78, 99, 123, 146-48, 164, 282,
294, 298, 299; denned by Sari, 53; de-
fined by Kharraz , 55; defined by Ju-
nayd, 58; defined by Wasitl, 80; defined
by Dard , 376; power through , 79;
tawakkul and , 117, 119; loving, 141;
connected wit h lubb, 192; of Satan,
195,214
Tauhld-i shuhudl,  368, 372
Tauhld-i wujudl,  368, 372
Tawaf (circumambulation) , 272
Tawajjuh (stron g concentratio n of master
and discipl e on each other), 205, 237,
366
Tawajud (tryin g to reach ecstasy) , 179
Tawakkul ("trus t in God"), 12, 117-20;
Shaqiq a n expert at, 38; Sahl and, 56;
Ruwaym on , 59; incompatibl e with
prayer, 156 . See also Trust in God
Tayy al-makdn  (to change one's place,
ubiquity), 20 5
Tacziya (mournin g for the martyr s of
Kerbela), 75 , 387
Tekerleme (Turkis h nonsens e poem),
334, 335,33 6Tekke (convent) , 231, 330; Mevlevi , 324
Tennure (whit e sleeveles s frock of the
Mevlevis), 32 5
Terceman (Turkis h prayer in the
Bektashiyya), 34 0
Theopathic locutions , 41, 47, 297. See also
Shath
Theosophical, 6 , 14, 24, 259, 313, 328 , 407
Theosophists, 47 , 57, 198, 274, 422
Theosophy, 96 , 200, 223, 357, 406
Tribulation, 5 , 45, 136, 137. See also
Affliction; Sufferin g
Trust in God, 12, 37, 52, 93, 100, 161, 170,
226, 240, 343, 376. See also Tawakkul
Tughra (artisti c calligraph y at the begin-
ning of books, formerly the name of the
ruler in a special form), 377, 413
Tul al-amal  ("extende d hope"), 120
Tulip (Idle),  130, 308, 422
U
Vflemek ("breathing " on someon e for
healing purposes) , 208
Ulema (th e lawyer divines and theo-
logians), 2 1
Umml ("illiterate, " epithet of the
Prophet), 26 , 218, 273
Unbearded (beautifu l young men as ob-
jects of love), 181, 289, 290, 313
Unio mystica,  4; union, 5, 6, 19, 38, 62,
65, 87, 100, 103, 105, 125, 184, 192, 253,
277- 3'7> 3lg. 333. 368> 393. 4*8, 424,
435; narcissu s of, 49; ocean as symbol
of, 51, 284, 306; death necessar y for,
76; separatio n and, 80, 135, 195, 285,
35 L 353- 354= throug h prayer, 152; as
dance wit h God, 182; denied to miracle
mongers, 212 ; Iqbal critical of, 307; not
substantial, 37 6
Uns ("intimacy") , 132, 192; See also
Hayba; Intimacy ; Wahshat
Urdu, 17 , 33, 74, 76, 160, 162, 163, 225,
226, 240, 265 n, 288, 289, 291, 294, 300,
322, 326, 367, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374,
377. 3 Sl. 388. 39° n. 393. 396, 406, 407,
415, 419, 434. See also Dakhni Urdu
cUrs ("wedding, " anniversar y of a saint's
death), 24 0
Uwaysl (withou t formal initiation) , 28,
89,105
Via: purgativa,  4, 98; illuminativa,  4, 98;
negationis, 49 ; contemplativa,  98
Vilayetname ("boo k on sainthood, "
hagiographical works) , 339
Violet: as symbol of the Sufi, 102, 308V

--- Page 535 ---
512 / INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Vision, 19,  74, 141, 376, 383, 432; in Para-
dise, 4, 52, 72, 161, 332, 435; of sun
or light, 115, 129, 270, 420; permanenc e
of God's, 131; as object of prayer, 160;
Prophet no t lost in, 204; of the Laylat
al-qadr, 193 , 430; on the Path, 255
W
W (waw),  420, 421
Wadud, al-  ("The Loving, " name of
God), 177
Wahdat al-wujud  ("unity of Being") , 267,
273, 284, 376, 401; Simnam on, 257;
blurring th e borders between religions ,
286, 357; Ahmad Sirhind i on, 368
Wahdat ash-shuhud,  267, 368, 401
Wahshat ("loneliness , estrangement") , 132
Wajd ("finding, " ecstasy) , 178, 179. See
also Ecstas y
Wall (pi. auliya 3, "saint") , 199. See also
Saints
Wall Allah:  equivalen t to Ali, 199
Wall minnat  Allah (saint through love),
203
Wall sidq  Allah (saint through works),
203
Waqf (tax-exemp t endowment) , 238
Waqfa ("standing, " in Niffari' s theology) ,
80
Waqt ("time, " moment , kairos), 129, 130,
139, 220
Wara* ("abstinence") , 31, no. See also
Asceticism; Renunciatio n
Warid ("visitation, " which comes into the
soul), 178
Wasala ("arrive, " "to be united") , 148
Way (end form in Sindhi poetry), 385, 390
Way of Junayd, 255
Well-preserved Table t (al-lauh  al-
mahfuz), 101,  194, 197, 414; Muham -
mad's sou l as, 224; man a copy of, 413
Wilayat ("saintship , sanctity") , 199, 200,
421; camma ("general") , 199; khassa
("special"), 199 . See also Saints; Saint-
ship, sanctit yWine, no , 137, 182, 288, 300, 340, 348,
353; mystical , 49, 75, 183, 275, 283, 342,
.35'. 352
Wird (pi. aurad, litany), 178, 243
World (ad-dunyd),  108, 120, 121, 292, 369,
421, 427; renunciatio n of, 14, 15, 16, 30,
31, 38, 40, 48, 109, 212, 334, 348, 377;
different attitude s toward , 24, 45, 352;
children of , 54; as seedbed for the
Otherworld, 107 , 399; miracle s belong
to, 128; as exile, 189; as shashdar,  285;
as winter , 308; as woman , 428
Wudd ("love , charity") , 132
Wujud ("finding, " existence) , 142, 260,
267
Y (I), 4_22
Yad ddsht  (concentratio n upon God, in
Naqshbandi theories) , 364
Ydd hard (recollection , in Naqshband i
theories), 36 4
Yaqln. Se e Certitud e
Yoga, 242 , 345, 358, 374
Z,422
Zdhid ("ascetic") : in Bektash i thought ,
connected wit h tarlqa,  340. See also
Asceticism
Zdhid-i zdhirparast  (the ascetic who is still
interested i n outwar d things) , in. See
also Asceticis m
Zahma ("pain") , 137
Zdlim ("tyrant, " who loves God for his
own sake) : connecte d with nafs, 191
Zdwiya ("corner, " dwellin g place of a
Sufi), 231
Zindlq (heretic) , 60, 127 n
Ziydra, ziyaret  ("visitin g place"), 239
Zuhd ("renunciation") , 37, no. See also
Asceticism; Renunciatio n
Zulf ("tresses") : symboli c meanin g of, 300zY

